

 
500
OutKast, ‘Aquemini’

LaFace, 1998

At a time when formulaic albums by Master P and Puff Daddy topped the charts, OutKast unleashed an explosive hip-hop that deployed live musicians, social commentary and a heavy dose of deep funk. Hits like “Rosa Parks” put the duo’s hometown “Hotlanta” on the rap map. Listen here.
499
B.B. King, ‘Live in Cook County Jail’

ABC, 1971

King was enjoying a career renaissance when he played this Chicago jail in 1970. He won over the hostile prisoners with definitive versions of his blues standards and his crossover hit “The Thrill Is Gone.” Listen here.
498
The Stone Roses, ‘The Stone Roses’

Silvertone, 1989

For a few glorious moments, the Stone Roses looked like they might lead another British Invasion. Instead, they fell apart – but first they made this incredible album, highlighted by the ecstatic eight-minute-long “I Am the Resurrection.” It single-handedly launched Nineties Brit pop. Listen here.
497
The White Stripes, ‘White Blood Cells’

Sympathy for the Record Industry, 2001

The third album by Jack and Meg White was the right dynamite for a mainstream breakthrough. Jack’s Delta-roadhouse fantasies, Detroit-garage-rock razzle and busted-love lyricism, as well as Meg’s toy-thunder drumming all peaked at once. Listen here.
496
Boz Scaggs, ‘Boz Scaggs’

Atlantic, 1969

The stone-solid grooves on this underrated gem come courtesy of the Muscle Shoals rhythm section; the soulful guitar comes courtesy of Scaggs and guest Duane Allman. Together, they made “Loan Me a Dime” an FM-radio classic – more than 10 minutes of knockout blues pleading and wailing. Listen here.
495
Bonnie Raitt, ‘Give It Up’

Warner Bros., 1972

California darling Raitt headed to Woodstock to cut her second LP – only to face near-monsoon weather. “My house had sand and salamanders,” Raitt said. She took refuge in the studio and churned out gorgeous folksy blues, including a cover of Jackson Browne‘s “Under the Falling Sky.” Listen here.
494
MGMT, ‘Oracular Spectacular’

Columbia, 2008

Two hipster geeks get some rad vintage keyboards and compose a suite of synthesized heartache. You don’t have to figure out a word of “Kids” to feel the poignant kick of that massive keyboard hook. Listen here.
493
Wilco, ‘Yankee Hotel Foxtrot’

Nonesuch, 2002

Wilco‘s great leap forward was a mix of rock tradition, electronics, oddball rhythms and experimental gestures. Jeff Tweedy’s lyrics pitted hope against doubt, with all bets off. Listen here.
492
Eurythmics, ‘Touch’

RCA, 1984

Annie Lennox looked like a gender-bending cybor, but she sang with soul; producer Dave Stewart hid behind his beard and masterminded the sound. Together they made divine synth pop, especially “Who’s That Girl?,” a tale of kinked-up sexual obsession, and their massive hit “Here Comes the Rain Again.” Listen here.
491
Albert King, ‘Born Under a Bad Sign’

Stax, 1967

King’s first album for the Stax label combines his hard, unflashy guitar playing with the sleek sound of the label’s house band, Booker T. and the MG’s. Hits such as “Crosscut Saw” and “Laundromat Blues” earned King a new rock & roll audience. Listen here.
490
ZZ Top, ‘Tres Hombres’

London, 1973

A decade before the Texas blues trio became MTV stars, ZZ Top got their first taste of national fame with this disc, which features one of their biggest hits, the John Lee Hooker-style boogie “La Grange,” as well as the boozy rocker “Jesus Just Left Chicago” and the concert anthem “Beer Drinkers and Hell Raisers.” Listen here.
489
Kiss, ‘Destroyer’

Casablanca, 1976

By their fifth album, Kiss were the most popular band in America, with sold-out stadium tours and eventually their own pinball machine, makeup line and a TV movie. Built around the proto power ballad “Beth,” this is a ridiculously over-the-top party-rock album that just gets better with age. Listen here.
488
Hüsker Dü, ‘New Day Rising’

SST, 1985

These three Minneapolis dudes played savagely emotional hardcore punk that became a big influence on Nirvana, among others. The Hüskers created a rorar like garbage trucks trying to sing Beach Boys songs, especially on the anthems “Celebrated Summer” and “Perfect Example.” Listen here.
487
Cyndi Lauper ,’She’s So Unusual’

Portrait, 1983

Lauper‘s first band had broken up and she was singing in a Japanese restaurant. Then this solo debut album of razor-sharp dance pop became the first by a female performer to score four Top Five hits, including “Girls Just Want to Have Fun” and “Time After Time.” Listen here.
486
Earth, Wind and Fire, ‘That’s the Way of the World’

Columbia, 1975

Before he got into African thumb pianos and otherworldly philosophizing, EWF founder Maurice White was a session drummer at Chess Studios. EWF’s sixth album is make-out music of the gods. Listen here.
485
Pearl Jam, ‘Vitalogy’

Epic, 1994

Their previous album, Vs., made Pearl Jam the most successful band in the world. They celebrated by suing Ticketmaster and making Vitalogy, where their mastery of rock’s past and future became complete. Soulful ballads like “Nothingman” are matched by hardcore-influenced rockers such as “Spin the Black Circle.” Listen here.
484
Mott the Hoople, ‘All the Young Dudes’

Columbia, 1972

Mott were a hard-rock band with a Dylan fixation until David Bowie got ahold of them. He penned the androgyne title track and had them cover Lou Reed‘s “Sweet Jane.” Mott would sound more soulful but never more sexy or glittery. Listen here.
483
Gang of Four, ‘Entertainment!’

Warner Bros., 1979

Formed in 1977, Gang of Four combined Marxist politics with punk rock. They played staccato guitar-driven funk, and the stiff, jerky aggression of songs such as “Damaged Goods” and “I Found That Essence Rare” invented a new style that influenced bands from the Minutemen to LCD Soundsystem. Listen here.
482
Steve Earle, ‘Guitar Town’

MCA, 1986

“I got a two-pack habit and a motel tan,” Earle sings on the title track. By the time he released his debut at 31, he had done two stints in Nashville as a songwriter and he wanted something else. Guitar Town is the rocker’s version of country, packed with songs about hard living in the Reagan Eighties. Listen here.
481
D’Angelo, ‘Voodoo’

Virgin, 2000

D’Angelo recorded his second album at Electric Lady, the Manhattan studio built by Jimi Hendrix. There he studied bootleg videos of Sixties and Seventies soul singers and cooked up an album heavy on bass and drenched in a post-coital haze. The single “Untitled (How Does It Feel?)” sounds like a great lost Prince song. Listen here.
480
Raekwon, ‘Only Built 4 Cuban Linx

Loud, 1995

The best Wu-Tang solo joint is a study in understated cool and densely woven verses. Over RZA’s hypnotically stark beats, Raekwon crafts breathtaking drug-rap narratives; it’s a rap album that rivals the mob movies hip-hop celebrates. Listen here.
479
Funkadelic, ‘Maggot Brain’

Westbound, 1971

“Play like your mama just died,” George Clinton told guitarist Eddie Hazel. The result was “Maggot Brain,” 10 minutes of Hendrix-style guitar anguish. This is the heaviest rock album the P-Funk ever created, but it also made room for the acoustic-guitar funk of “Can You Get to That.” Listen here.
478
Loretta Lynn, ‘All Time Greatest Hits’

MCA Nashville, 2002

Anyone who thinks a woman singing country music is cute should listen to “Fist City,” where Lynn threatens to beat down a woman if she doesn’t lay off her man. Seventies greats like “Rated ‘X'” and “The Pill” brought feminism to the honky-tonks. Listen here.
477
Merle Haggard, ‘Down Every Road’

Capitol, 1996

Haggard’s tough country sound was born in Bakersfield, California, a.k.a. Nashville West. His songs are full of drifters, fugitives and rogues, and this four-disc set – culled from his seminal recordings for Capitol as well as MCA and Epic – is the ultimate collection from one of country’s finest singers. Listen here.
476
The Notorious B.I.G., ‘Life After Death’

Bad Boy, 1997

Released less than a month after Biggie‘s murder, the prophetic Life After Death is two CDs of humor and bravado, no filler at all, as he tops himself in “Mo Money Mo Problems” and”#!*@ You Tonight.” Listen here.
475
Elvis Costello and the Attractions, ‘Armed Forces’

Columbia, 1979

Costello‘s third album is all tightly wound paranoia. The concept is personal politics; the original title was Emotional Fascism, and one song is called “Two Little Hitlers.” The keyboard-driven sound of “Accidents Will Happen” helped define New Wave. Listen here.
474
Manu Chao, ‘Próxima Estación: Esperanza’

Virgin, 2001

Globally, Chao had long been a Marley-size figure. But this gem gave Americans a taste of his wild-ass greatness. Chao rocks an acoustic guitar over horns and beat­boxes while rambling multi­lingually about crucial topics from politics to pot.
473
The Smiths, ‘The Smiths’

Sire, 1984

"I recognize that mystical air/It means I'd like to seize your underwear," Morrissey moans, and rock music was never the same. The Smiths' debut is a showcase for Morrissey's morose wit and Johnny Marr's guitar chime, trudging through England's cheerless marshes in "Still Ill" and "This Charming Man."
472
George Michael, ‘Faith’

Columbia, 1987

When Michael left Wham!, he signified his new maturity by not shaving. Thankfully, his music was still tasty pop candy – six of these songs hit the Top Five on the singles charts. "I Want Your Sex" is one of the decade's finest Prince imitations, and the best ballad is the spooky, soulful "Father Figure."
471
Richard and Linda Thompson, ‘I Want to See the Bright Lights Tonight’

Island, 1974

Richard played guitar like a Sufi-mystic Neil Young; wife Linda had the voice of a Celtic Emmylou Harris. This is their great statement of folk-rock dread.
470
LL Cool J, ‘Radio’

Def Jam, 1985

L.L. Cool J was only 16 when he released his first single, "I Need a Beat." A year later, he had the first hit on the fledgling Def Jam label. The sound he and Rick Rubin found on "I Can't Live Without My Radio" and "Rock the Bells" was harder and leaner than hip-hop had ever been.
469
The Fugees, ‘The Score’

Ruffhouse/Columbia, 1996

Led by Wyclef Jean, the Fugees created eclectic, politically aware R&B hip-hop, but the breakout was a cover of Roberta Flack's "Killing Me Softly With His Song," highlighting Lauryn Hill's amazing pipes.
468
The Paul Butterfield Blues Band, ‘The Paul Butterfield Blues Band’

Elektra, 1965

Where American white kids got the notion they could play the blues. This band had two kiler guitarists: Michael Bloomfield and Elvin Bishop.

Vote for the 2013 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Inductees
467
Bruce Springsteen, ‘Tunnel of Love’

Columbia, 1987

After the big-scale Born in the U.S.A., this came as a shock – an album of stark, intimate, mostly acoustic confessionals. The newly wed superstar gets personal on adult love songs such as "One Step Up" and "Walk Like a Man." The marriage didn't last – but the music does.
466
Coldplay, ‘A Rush of Blood to the Head’

Capitol, 2002

Coldplay churn out bighearted British guitar rock on their second album – what Chris Martin aptly called "emotion that can make you feel sad while you're moving your legs."
465
The Magnetic Fields, ’69 Love Songs’

Merge, 1999

The title says it all: three discs of brilliantly turned tunes about pop's signature emotion. Stephin Merritt lived out a Tin Pan Alley fantasy as he spooled his droll bass over synth pop, bubblegum, Afropop, show tunes, country and more. It's irony on steroids, but try to get through "Papa Was a Rodeo" without shedding a tear. 
464
Def Leppard, ‘Hysteria’

Mercury, 1987

Def Leppard had a run of bad luck in the Eighties, especially when drummer Rick Allen lost his arm in a car crash on New Year's Eve 1984. But the lads admirably stuck by their old mate, who learned to play drums using his feet. The band was vindicated when Hysteria and "Pour Some Sugar on Me" became a smash.
463
Echo and the Bunnymen, ‘Heaven Up Here’

Sire, 1981

The Bunnymen refresh psychedelia for the New Wave era with an arena of foggy guitars and doomy drums, while Ian McCulloch updates the aura of Jim Morrison. Melody meets melodrama on the title track and on "A Promise," where McCulloch sing-sobs a story of love gone wrong.
462
R.E.M., ‘Document’

I.R.S., 1987

R.E.M. were trying something new with each album in the Eighties, but this straight-ahead rock move was the one that made them mainstream stars. "The One I Love" was a hit, but the fan favorite is the manic "It's the End of the World as We Know It (And I Feel Fine)."
461
Public Image Ltd., ‘Metal Box’

Virgin, 1979

After the Sex Pistols imploded, Johnny Rotten reclaimed his real name  – John Lydon – and started a bold new band. PiL played eerie art punk with dub bass and slashing guitar. Metal Box (retitled Second Edition in the U.S.) originally came as three vinyl discs in a metal film canister.
460
Hole, ‘Live Through This’

DGC, 1994

On Hole's breakthrough album, Courtney Love wants to be "the girl with the most cake," and she spends the whole album paying for it, in the melodic punk-rock anguish of "Miss World," "Softer, Softest" and "Doll Parts." Her husband Kurt Cobain's body was found just days before the album was released.
459
The Drifters, ‘Golden Hits’

Atlantic, 1968

By the early 1960s, the Drifters had evolved into the most suave soul group on the block. Even after Ben E. King went solo (scoring with "Stand By Me"), producers Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller and the Drifters kept coming up with timeless odes to urban romance such as "Up on the Roof" and "Under the Boardwalk."
458
Elton John, ‘Tumbleweed Connection’

John has always had a jones for the myth of the American West. Along with lyricist Bernie Taupin, he fully indulges those cowboy fantasies here. "Amoreena" plays unforgettably in the opening scene of the Al Pacino film Dog Day Afternoon.
457
My Morning Jacket, ‘Z’

RCA, 2005

These Kentucky boys took a giant leap forward on their fourth album – giant enough to take them from a jammy Americana band to awe-inspiring purveyors of interstellar art rock. My Morning Jacket infused Z with both Eno-esque keyboards and sculpted guitars, but also Skynyrd-style riffs and bar-band grooves. 
Marvin Gaye, Here, My Dear456
Marvin Gaye, ‘Here, My Dear’

Motown, 1978

It's one of the weirdest Motown records ever. Gaye's divorce settlement required him to make a new album and pay the royalties to his ex-wife – the sister of Motown boss Berry Gordy. So Gaye made this bitterly funny double LP of breakup songs, including "You Can Leave, But It's Going to Cost You."
Los Lobos, How Will the Wolf Survive455
Los Lobos, ‘How Will the Wolf Survive?’

Slash/Warner Bros., 1984

"We were kids with long hair and plaid shirts playing Mexican folk instruments," said Los Lobos' Louie Perez. But the band from East L.A. was a surprise success, mixing traditional Mexican sounds with blues and rockabilly for rough roots rock.
Alice Cooper, Love It to Death454
Alice Cooper, ‘Love It to Death’

Warner Bros., 1971

Onstage, Cooper was the shock-rock king who decapitated baby dolls, but his early studio albums are smart, razor-sharp attacks of Detroit rock. On Love It to Death, producer Bob Ezrin joins him for the twisted kicks of "Hallowed Be My Name" and the teen-spirit anthem "I'm Eighteen."
EPMD, Strictly Business453
EPMD, ‘Strictly Business’

Priority, 1988

In the summer of '88, Erick Sermon and Parrish Smith, a.k.a. EPMD (Erick and Parrish Making Dollars), rolled out of Long Island with a new style of slow-grooving hip-hop funk. Cut in the era before artists cleared their samples, the title jam even pilfers "I Shot the Sheriff."
John Prine, John Prine452
John Prine, ‘John Prine’

Atlantic, 1971

Prine was a mailman-turned-folk-singer, and his debut is unique in how it views American life with generosity, tolerance and wit. Prine sang about smoking dope ("Illegal Smile"), but his empathy for the old folks with "Hello in There" made most hippie songwriters sound smug.
Amy Winehouse, Back to Black451
Amy Winehouse, ‘Back to Black’

Universal, 2007

It's sad to think back on how fresh this record sounded at the time – funny and hip, revivalist but forward-looking. Winehouse, a tatted 23-year-old with a beehive crown, matched the spirit of her R&B heroes, cussing, cracking wise and casually breaking your heart. She triggered a new era for brilliantly weird women in pop. 

Jackson Browne, For Everyman450
Jackson Browne, ‘For Everyman’

Asylum, 1973

On his second album, Browne emerged as the J.D. Salinger of the L.A. singer-songwriters; songs like "These Days" (first recorded by Velvet Underground singer Nico) capture the shift from the idealistic Sixties to the disillusioned Seventies.
Big Star, Third/Sister Lovers449
Big Star, ‘Third/Sister Lovers’

PVC, 1978

Big Star recorded their third and final album in 1974, but it didn't get released until 1978, in part because singer Alex Chilton sounds like he's having a nervous breakdown. It's a record of gorgeous, disjointed heartbreak ballads.
The Police, Synchronicity448
The Police, ‘Synchronicity’

A&M, 1983

"I do my best work when I'm in pain and turmoil," Sting told Rolling Stone. And indeed, the dissolution of his first marriage produced some of his best work yet, including "King of Pain" and the stalker's anthem "Every Breath You Take." There was pain and turmoil in the band, too – it would be the Police's last album.
447
Stan Getz and Joao Gilberto, ‘Getz/Gilberto’
Stan Getz Compact Jazz HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Verve, 1964

Brazilian bossa nova met American jazz, as saxman Getz teamed up with guitarist-singer Gilberto and pianist-composer Antonio Carlos Jobim. Gilberto's wife, Astrud, became a star herself with a sensual guest vocal on "The Girl From Ipanema."
446
MC5, ‘Back in the USA’
MC5 Back in the USA HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1970

In the late Sixties, the Motor City Five were the house band for the White Panther Party, devoted to "dope, guns and fucking in the streets." But on their second album, they channel their ferocious sound and politics into the concise, Chuck Berry-like riffs of "The American Ruse," "Looking at You" and "Shaking Street."
Steve Miller Band, 'Fly Like an Eagle'445
Steve Miller Band, ‘Fly Like an Eagle’

Capitol, 1976

After a 1972 car accident sidelined him for nearly a year, Miller returned with a pop-rock sound that dominated Seventies radio: slick guitar boogie as catchy as Abba and as danceable as disco. "Rock 'n Me" and "Take the Money and Run" kept Eagle on the charts for nearly two years.
War, The World Is A Ghetto444
War, ‘The World Is A Ghetto’

United Artists, 1972

A badass Latin-funk band doing a song about a Latino TV show from the Fifities – that song was "The Cisco Kid," and the band was War, L.A.'s answer to P-Funk. But War were serious: The title song is a smoldering reflection on inner-city life.
Cheap Trick, 'In Color'443
Cheap Trick, ‘In Color’

Epic, 1977

They were down-home Midwestern boys from Rockford, Illinois, but Cheap Trick had a rock & roll approach as twisted as guitarist Rick Nielsen's bow ties. With blond pinup boy Robin Zander on vocals, the Trick rocked Beatles-style melodies such as "Oh Caroline," "Downed" and "Come On, Come On."
Devo, Q Are We Not Men A We Are Devo442
Devo, ‘Q: Are We Not Men? A: We Are Devo!’

Warner Bros., 1978

They came from Akron, Ohio, wore matching jumpsuits and had a sinister theory of devolution. Their debut album runs on rubber-punk guitars and even more sinister mechanized New Wave beats.
Suicide, 'Suicide'441
Suicide, ‘Suicide’

Red Star, 1977

These New York synth punks evoke everything from the Velvet Underground to rockabilly. Martin Rev's low-budget electronics are violent and hypnotic; Alan Vega screams as a rhythmic device. Late-night listening to "Frankie Teardrop," a 10-minute-plus tale of a multiple murder, is not recommended.
440
The Pogues, ‘Rum Sodomy and The Lash’

MCA, 1985

With a voice like an ashtray, Shane MacGowan led this fabulous disaster of an Irish folk-punk band. Produced by Elvis Costello (who married bassist Cait O'Riordan), Rum careens between the maudlin and the explosive.
439
Sam Cooke, ‘Live At The Harlem Square Club, 1963’
Sam Cooke Live at the harlem Square club HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1985

Cooke was elegance personified, but he works this Florida club until it's hotter than hell, while sounding like he never breaks a sweat. He croons "For Sentimental Reasons" like a superlover, and when the crowd sings along with him, it's magic.
438
The Cure, ‘Boys Don’t Cry’

PVC, 1980

Before they became a goth-punk group, the Cure were a minimalist, inventive post-punk power trio. Boys is all hummable hooks, choppy guitars and mopey vocals. "10:15 Saturday Night" and "Jumping Someone Else's Train" are ingenious: You wait for a guitar solo and get a club-footed bass line instead.
437
Lil Wayne, ‘Tha Carter III’

Cash Money/Universal Motown, 2008

"I am so far from the others," Wayne rapped. "I can eat them for supper/Get in my spaceship and hover." And the N'awlins-bred genius made good on that boast on a weird, luscious pop-rap odyssey.
436
Beck, ‘Sea Change’
Beck Sea Change HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

DGC, 2002

Breakup records are rarely this lovely. Sea Change is the pristine sound of everything falling apart, a glossy take on a bummed-out Sixties folk sound. The music seems to be floating up from the bottom of the ocean; the words were straight from Beck's broken heart.
435
Nirvana, ‘In Utero’
Nirvana In Utero HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Geffen, 1993

Nirvana hired hard-nosed Steve Albini to record the follow-up to Nevermind. Geffen asked them to clean up some of the results, and you can hear the tension in white-noise ruckus like "Serve the Servants." But the only thing that can explain the scalding "Rape Me" is inner pain.
434
Big Star, ‘#1 Record’
Big Star #1 Record HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Ardent/Stax, 1972

Alex Chilton and Chris Bell were the Memphis whiz kids at the heart of Big Star. They mixed British-pop finesse with all-American hard rock, from the surging "Feel" to the acoustic "Thirteen." Big Star didn't sell many records, but the Eighties explosion of poppy garage bands would've been unimaginable without them.
433
George Harrison, ‘All Things Must Pass’
George Harrison All Things Must Pass HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Apple, 1970

Harrison had almost enough songs stored up from his Beatles days for a triple LP – the gas starts to run out during the jams on Side Six. But spiritual guitar quests like "My Sweet Lord" and "What Is Life" became classics.
432
Brian Eno, ‘Here Come The Warm Jets’
Brian Eno Here Come the Warm jets HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1975

Eno's first solo album pioneered a new kind of glammy art rock: jagged, free-form and dreamy. "Baby's on Fire" and "Needles in the Camel's Eye" are vicious rockers with detached vocals, and Robert Fripp's warped guitars swarm and stutter.
431
PJ Harvey, ‘Stories From the City, Stories From the Sea’

Island, 2000

Polly Harvey, happy? It was a surprise: But album number five found her in New York and in love. The result was lusher than anything she had recorded but also vibrant and surprisingly catchy.
430
Vampire Weekend, ‘Vampire Weekend’

XL, 2009

Vampire Weekend came out of Columbia University displaying an affinity for boat shoes and African guitar music. Their debut was full of suavely seductive indie-pop songs about college campuses and trysts with Benetton-wearing ladies. Ezra Koenig's Paul Simon-esque melodies are as refined as his education.
429
Brian Eno, ‘Another Green World’
Brian Eno Another Green World HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1975

After years as a rock eccentric, Eno said goodbye to pop-song form with this album of pure synthetic beauty, mixing lush electronics ("Becalmed") with acoustic intruments ("Everything Merges With the Night") to cast a truly hypnotic spell.
428
The Police, ‘Outlandos D’Amour’
The Police Outlandos d'Amour HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

A&M, 1978

The Police got bigger but they never sounded fresher, absorbing reggae into the spare, bouncy sound of their debut album. "Roxanne" and "Next to You" prove Sting was already a top-notch songwriter.
427
Peter Wolf, ‘Sleepless’
Peter Wolf Sleepless HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Artemis, 2002

Wolf accomplishes a rare feat on this modern blues album: He sings about adult roance without sounding jaded. The former J. Geils Band singer testifies about true love in his soulful growl, with help from friends like Mick Jagger and Keith Richards.
426
Cheap Trick, ‘At Budokan’
Cheap Trick Live at Budokan HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1979

After three studio albums, Cheap Trick were bigger in Japan than in America. But this record of a live Tokyo gig became their first U.S. hit. The Japanese schoolgirls are practically the lead instrument here, screaming their lungs out to "Surrender" and "I Want You to Want Me."
425
Gram Parsons, ‘Grievous Angel’
Gram Parson Grievous Angel HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1974

Parsons helped invent country rock with the Byrds and the Flying Burrito Brothers, and he deepened it here. Emmylou Harris was his ideal singing partner, and their voices blend in the high-lonesome wail of "Brass Buttons" and "$1,000 Wedding." Weeks after finishing the album, Parsons was dead at 26.
424
Bruce Springsteen, ‘The Rising’

Columbia, 2002

Springsteen's response to 9/11 was an extraordinary 15-song requiem that searched for meaning in the inexplicable tragedy while saluting the grace and courage of the dead and those who mourn them. The first E Street Band album since the Eighties, it kicked off Springsteen's creative resurgence. 
423
Diana Ross and The Supremes, ‘Anthology’
Diana Ross & the Supremes Anthology HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Motown, 1973

In the heyday of Motown, the Supremes were their own hit factory, all glamour and heartbreak. Diana Ross high points like "You Keep Me Hangin' On" and "Where Did Our Love Go" are still spine-tingling.
422
The Ronettes, ‘Presenting the Fabulous Ronettes’

Philles, 1964

The Ronettes were pop goddesses dressed as Catholic schoolgirls gone to hell and back, with Ronnie Bennett belting out hits like "Be My Baby" over future husband Phil Spector's Wall of Sound.
421
Various Artists, ‘The Best of Girl Groups Volumes 1 and 2’
The Best of the Girl Groups Volume 1 HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Rhino, 1990

In the lean years between Elvis and the Beatles, girl groups like the Shirelles and the Shangri-Las kept the spirit of rock & roll alive. This series has the classics.
420
Buddy Holly and the Crickets, ‘The “Chirping” Crickets’
Buddy Holly The Chirping Crickets HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Brunswick, 1957

Holly was only 21 when he cut these tracks, some on an Oklahoma Air Force base. "That'll Be the Day," "Oh Boy!" and "Not Fade Away" fused country, rockabilly and R&B into epochal rock & roll.
419
Portishead, ‘Dummy’
Portishead Dummy HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Go! Discs, 1994

Portishead uses some of the same building blocks as fellow Bristol, England trip-hoppers Massive Attack – woozy break beats, jazzy samples, live guitar, girl-singer/guy-programmer dynamic – but Beth Gibbons' brooding, pop-cabaret vocals showed to the world that you could feel real pain over a trip-hop groove.
418
Paul McCartney and Wings, ‘Band On The Run’
Wings Band on the Run HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Apple, 1973

Wings trekked to Lagos, Nigeria, for seven stressful weeks to make Band, regarded by many as McCartney's finest post-Beatles hour. Opening with the one-two punch of "Band on the Run" and "Jet," it proved that McCartney still knew how to rock.
417
U2, ‘Boy’
U2 Boy HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1980

Too ingenuous for punk, too unironic for New Wave, U2 arrived on Boy as big-time dreamers with the ambition to back it up. The Dublin foursome boasted Bono's arena-ready voice and the Edge's echoey, effects-laden guitar, as well as anthemic songs such as the club favorite "I Will Follow."
416
Tom Waits, ‘Mule Variations’
Tom Waits Mule Variations HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Anti-/Epitaph, 1999

After five silent years, Variations was the victorious return of Waits' rawboned, bluesy art rock. Using found instruments for rhythm and Smokey Hormel's angular guitar for color, Waits careers from carnival baker to croaky balladeer. The highlights: the sad but sweet "Hold On" and "House Where Nobody Lives."
415
Van Halen, ‘Van Halen’
Van Halen HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1978

This debut gave the world a new guitar hero (Eddie Van Halen) and charismatic frontman (David Lee Roth). Tunes such as "Runnin' With the Devil" and "Ain't Talkin' 'Bout Love" put the swagger back in hard rock, and Eddie's jaw-dropping technique, particularly on "Eruption," raised the bar for rock guitar.
414
The Go- Go’s, ‘Beauty and The Beast’
Go Go's Beauty and the Beat HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

I.R.S., 1981

The most popular girl group of the New Wave surfed to the top of the charts with "We Got the Beat" and "Our Lips Are Sealed." And its entire debut welded punkish spirit to party-minded pop.
413
Minuteman, ‘Doubles Nickels on The Dime’
Minutemen Double Nickels on the Dime HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

SST, 1984

"Our band could be your life," sing the Minutemen, perfectly articulating punk's Everyman ideal. Guitarist D. Boon and bassist Mike Watt push each other to fast, funny and agitated heights on this 45-song opus.
412
Wire, ‘Pink Flag’

Harvest, 1977

This first-generation U.K. punk band made sparse tunes that erupted in combustible snippets on its 21-track debut album. The curt mania of "12XU" had a massive influence on hardcore punk, and bands like Sonic Youth and R.E.M. took to the arty blurt of songs like "Strange" and "Ex Lion Tamer."
411
Eric Clapton, ‘461 Ocean Boulevard’
Eric Clapton HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RSO, 1974

Clapton returned from heroin addiction with a disc of mellow, springy grooves minus guitar histrionics. He paid tribute to Robert Johnson and Elmore James, but his cover of Bob Marley's "I Shot the Sheriff" became his first Number One hit.
410
Bob Dylan, ‘Time Out of Mind’
Bob Dylan Time Out of Mind HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1997

The first of Dylan's three late-career triumphs. Producer Daniel Lanois' dark, atmospheric settings envelop Dylan in a sonic fog appropriate to the isolation and distance he sings of in a ravaged, weary voice. The songs – especially "Love Sick" and "Not Dark Yet" – are ghostly but forceful.
409
The Doors, ‘Strange Days’
The Doors Strange Days HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1967

The Doors set out into darker territory on their second album. The catchy single "Love Me Two Times" is overshadowed by a mood of foreboding and alienation, especially on "People Are Strange" and "When the Music's Over," which demands, "We want the world, and we want it now!"
408
Sinead O’Connor, ‘I Do Not Want What I haven’t Got’
Sinead O'Connor HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Chrysalis, 1990

O'Connor's second LP delivers true originality and range, from "Nothing Compares 2 U" to the maternal warmth of "Three Babies" to the fiddle and beatbox of "I Am Stretched on Your Grave."
407
The Clash, ‘Sandinista!’
The Clash Sandinista HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1980

The Clash's ballooning ambition peaked with this three-album set, named after the Nicaraguan revolutionary movement. Joe Strummer and Mick Jones reached beyond punk and reggae into dub, R&B, calypso, gospel and even a kids' chorus on "Career Opportunities."
406
PJ Harvey, ‘Rid of Me’
PJ Harvey Rid of Me HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1993

Like Patti Smith, she wanted to be Bob Dylan. Unlike Patti Smith, she played guitar very, very loud. Polly Jean Harvey's second album, recorded with Steve Albini, is charged with aggressive eroticism and rock fury (check the scalding title track). Rid of Me slams from blues to goth to grunge, often in the space of a single song.
405
Big Star, ‘Radio City’
Big Star Radio City HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Ardent, 1974

As with the Velvet Underground, Big Star's influence far outstripped their commercial success. On this lean, guitar-driven LP, they come up with a new, upside-down pop sound, filtering their love of the Beatles through their Memphis-soul roots. Towering achievement: the blissful, sad "September Gurls."
404
Dr John, ‘Dr. John’s Gumbo’
Dr. John Gumbo HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ATCO, 1972

After a series of eerie, voodoo-stoked records, pianist Mac Rebennack – a.k.a. Dr. John – returned to his New Orleans roots with spirited covers of classics such as "Iko Iko" and "Junko Partner." With his rolling piano figures and gritty vocals, he rekindled interest in the Crescent City sound.
403
Lynyrd Skynyrd, ‘(Pronounced Leh-Nerd Skin-Nerd)’
Lynyrd skynyrd HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1973

From the git-go, these Southern rockers played hard, lived hard and shot from the hip (with three guitars!). Discovered and produced by Al Kooper, Skynyrd offered taut rockers including "Poison Whiskey" and the ultimate anthem, "Freebird."
402
Nas, ‘Illmatic’
Nas illmatic HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1994

Other rappers were harder and better-armed, but nobody captured the creeping menace of life on the streets quite like this 20-year-old from New York's Queensbridge projects. With lines like "I never sleep, 'cause sleep is the cousin of death," Nas showed more poetic style than any MC since Rakim.
401
Red Hot Chili Peppers, ‘Californication’
Red Hot chili Peppers Californication HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1999

Turning their focus to songs instead of jams, the Chilis steered frontman Anthony Kiedis' voice into a radio-friendlier wail, and the reappearance of guitarist John Frusciante helped form beautifully composed songs such as "Scar Tissue."

400
The Temptations, ‘Anthology’
The Temptations HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Motown, 1995

Indisputably the greatest black vocal group of the modern era, this quintet created masterpiece after masterpiece of chugging, gospel-tinged soul. Anthology captures a slice of the Temps' prime, including "My Girl," "I Can't Get Next to You" and "I Wish It Would Rain." 
399
Tom Waits, ‘Rain Dogs’
Tom Waits Rain Dogs HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1985

"I like that weird, ludicrous things," Waits once said. That understatement plays out most clearly on Rain Dogs, his finest portrait of the tragic kingdom of the streets. Waits abandons his grungy minimalism on the gorgeous "Downtown Train" and gets backing by Keith Richards on "Big Black Mariah."
398
ZZ Top, ‘Eliminator’
ZZ TOP eliminator HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1983

Pure Americana: This song cycle about burning rubber, high heels and adrenaline took fuzzed-out Texas blues guitar and lashed it around rollicking boogie. ZZ Top's megaplatinum album also had a high-gloss Eighties sheen and singles like "Sharp Dressed Man" that would help it sell some 10 million copies.
397
Massive Attack, ‘Blue Lines’
massive attack blue lines HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Virgin, 1991

One of the most influential records of the Nineties, Lines was perhaps the first post-hip-hop classic: a combination of rap, dub and soul that gave birth to what used to be called trip-hop. "What's important to us is the pace," said the band's 3D, "the weight of the bass and the mood."
396
Roxy Music, ‘For Your Pleasure’
Roxy Music For Your Pleasure HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1973

Keyboardist Brian Eno's last album with Roxy Music is the pop equivalent of Ultra-suede: highly stylish, abstract-leaning art rock. The collision of Eno's experimentalism and singer Bryan Ferry's romanticism gives Pleasure a wild, tense charm – especially on the driving "Editions of You" and "Do the Strand."
395
LCD Soundsystem, ‘Sound of Silver’

DFA/Capitol, 2007

New York electro-punk kingpin James Murphy makes his masterpiece: Every track sounds like a different band's greatest hit, from the political punk goof "North American Scum" to the elegiac synth-pop breakup lament "Someone Great." 
394
Randy Newman, ‘Good Old Boys’
Randy Newman Good Old Boys HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1974

Newman draws on his roots in the blues and New Orleans boogie to uncorck this blistering portrait of the American South. He shows that he was pop's most cutting satirist on "Rednecks" – a song that doesn't spare Northern or Southern racism; Newman once said he still gets nervous playing it in some cities.
393
M.I.A., ‘Kala’

Interscope, 2007

The London-via-Sri Lanka art-punk funkateer came on like she knew she was kind of a big deal, and backed up her bravado. M.I.A.'s second album restyled hip-hop as one big international block party, mixing up beatbox riddims, playground rhymes, left-field samples and gunshots. It's a dance-off in a combat zone.
392
The Beatles, ‘Let It Be’
Beatles Let it Be HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Apple, 1970

The sound of the world's greatest pop group at war with itself. John Lennon is at his most acidic; George Harrison's "I Me Mine" is about the sin of pride, sung with plaintive exhaustion; Paul McCartney's title track is like a survival mantra. Phil Spector pieced it all into a sad swan song.
391
Jackson Browne, ‘The Pretender’
Jackson Browne The Pretender HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Asylum, 1976

Laid-back Southern California folk rock took on new weight with Browne's fourth album. His first wife committed suicide while he was writing these songs, and they became hard-bitten. "Say a prayer for the pretender," he sings, "who started out so young and strong, only to surrender."
390
The White Stripes, ‘Elephant’
White Stripes Elephant HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

V2, 2003

Jack and Meg White proved their minimalist garage rock had more depth and power than anyone expected. On tracks like the slow-burning "Seven Nation Army" and "The Hardest Button to Button," Jack's songwriting finally matches his blues-fanboy, art-school shtick.
389
Don Henley, ‘The End of the Innocence’
Don Henley End of Innocence HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Geffen, 1989

Returning to the theme of "Desperado," the former Eagle hitched some of his finest melodies (especially on the gentle title track) to sharply focused lyrical studies of men in troubled transition – from youth to adulthood, innocence to responsibility.
388
Various Artists, ‘The Indestructible Beat of Soweto’

Shanachia, 1985

The best album ever tagged as "world music," this compilation of South African pop is still fresh – full of funky, loping beats and gruff vocals, with a sweet track by Ladysmith Black Mambazo, who soon appeared on Graceland.
387
Wu-Tang Clan, ‘Enter the Wu-Tang: 36 Chambers’
The Wu-Tang Clan Enter the Wu-Tang 36 Chambers HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Loud/RCA, 1993

East Coast hip-hop came back in 1993, thanks to a nine-man troupe of Staten Island MCs with a fascination for Hong Kong martial-arts mythology and producer RZA's love of menacing atmospherics. Hip-hop had rarely been this dirty.
386
Steely Dan, ‘Pretzel Logic’
Steely Dan Pretzel Logic HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ABC, 1974

Donald Fagen and Walter Becker make their love of jazz explicit, covering Duke Ellington and copping the intro of "Rikki Don't Lose That Number" from hard-bop pianist Horace Silver. The guitars on their third LP are dialed back for a sound that's slick and airtight without being cold. The lyrics? As twisted as ever.
385
Bob Dylan, ‘Love and Theft’
Bob Dylan Love and Theft HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 2001

Blood, desperation and wicked gallows humor are in the air as Dylan and his road band provide a raucous tour of 20th-century musical America via jump blues, slow blues, rockabilly, Tin Pan Alley ballads and country swing. "Summer Days" sounds like the exact moment when R&B morphed into rock & roll.
384
The Who, ‘A Quick One (Happy Jack)’
The Who A Quick One HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1966

The Who were in the middle of an experimental phase, and the results were fascinatingly quirky. "Boris the Spider" is a basso-profundo jape, and the miniopera title track foreshadows Pete Townshend's songwriting ambition.
383
Talking Heads, ‘More Songs About Buildings and Food’
Talking Heads Mores Songs HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1978

The Heads' second album weaved funk and gospel (including a cover of Al Green's "Take Me to the River") into their twitchy, Spartan sound, announcing themselves as the newest of the New Wave bands.
382
Modern Lovers, ‘Modern Lovers’
The Modern Lovers HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Beserkly, 1976

Jonathan Richman moved from Boston to New York in the hopes of sleeping on Lou Reed's couch. That influence shows on the two-chord anthem "Roadrunner." Recorded in 1972 but not released until 1976, Lovers hot-wired the Velvets' tough sounds to odes of suburban romanticism.
381
The Beach Boys, ‘Smile (2011 Version)’

Capitol, 2011

The five-disc director's cut of the Greatest Pop Album Never Made is an unfinished symphony of exquisite ping-ponging harmonies and psychedelicized Cali-surf soul. The included demos and fragments show Brian Wilson painting his masterpiece. 
380
Toots and the Maytals, ‘Funky Kingston’
Toots & the Maytals Funky Kingston HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1975

Loose, funky, exuberant, Kingston is the quintessential document of Jamaica's greatest act after Bob Marley. Showcasing some of the Maytals' best songs ("Pressure Drop" and borrowing from soul, pop and gospel, the album introduced the world to the great Toots Hibbert.
379
TLC, ‘CrazySexyCool’
TLC Crazy Sexy Cool HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Things were not well with TLC during the making of CrazySexyCool: Lisa "Left Eye" Lopes was lighting literal fires, and the trio would soon be filing for bankruptcy. But they emerged with the most effervescent and soulful girl-group R&B anyone had seen since the Supremes.
378
Oasis, ‘(What’s the Story) Morning Glory?’
Oasis What's the Story Morning Glory HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1995

With their second album, the fighting Gallagher brothers embraced the Stones and Beatles comparisons and established themselves as a force in their own right, especially on the majestic "Wonderwall."
377
John Lee Hooker, ‘The Ultimate Collection 1948-1990’
John Lee Hooker The Ultimate Collection HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Rhino, 1991

"Boogie Chillen" was Hooker's first hit and one of the last songs he ever played. In between that was a lifetime of pure mojo. Collection houses that historic song, plus "Boom Boom" and a voice Bonnie Raitt said could "tap into all the pain he'd ever felt."
376
Björk, ‘Post’
Bjork HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1995

"I have to recreate the universe every morning when I wake up," Björk said, explaining her second solo album's utter lack of musical inhibition. Post bounces from big-band jazz ("It's Oh So Quiet") to trip-hop. Fun fact: For her vocals, Björk extended her mic cord to a beach so she could sing to the sea.
375
Jackson Browne, ‘Late for the Sky’
Jackson Browne Late for the Sky HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Asylum, 1974

On his dark third album, Browne explored, in the words of one Rolling Stone reviewer, the "romantic possibility in the shadow of an apocalypse." There's an undercurrent of dread on Late for the Sky, from "Before the Deluge" to "For a Dancer" – not to mention a lot of obvious songwriting genius.
374
Roxy Music, ‘Siren’
Roxy Music Siren HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ATCO, 1975

"New customers are always welcome!" Bryan Ferry joked as "Love Is the Drug" became his band's first U.S. hit. This delicious LP of lounge-lizard ennui, inspired in part by Ferry's girlfriend Jerry Hall, draws upon Roxy's arty roots even as it anticipates the more rarefied atmospheres of Avalon.
373
Jefferson Airplane, ‘Volunteers’
Jefferson Airplane volunteers HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA Victor, 1969

Guitarist Jorma Kaukonen called Paul Kantner's revolutionary cheerleading "naive," but that didn't prevent the band from delivering this album with sweeping fervor. Also here: the gorgeous "Wooden Ships" and "Eskimo Blue Day," where Grace Slick sings, "The human name doesn't mean shit to a tree."
372
The Police, ‘Reggatta de Blanc’
The Police Reggatta de Blanc HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

A&M, 1979

The Police may have been lumped in with U.K. punk, but Sting said the mission was always to "sell great music to masses of people." They did that with Reggatta, an album best known for "Message in a Bottle" but distinguished by the mutant reggae of "The Bed's Too Big Without You" and "Walking on the Moon."
371
Arctic Monkeys, ‘Whatever People Say I Am, That’s What I’m Not’

Domino USA, 2006

Scrappy, lager-fueled tunes about being young and bored in a bleak Northern England steel town. Even Yanks couldn't resist these raging Brit-pop-punk gems. 
370
Mott the Hoople, ‘Mott’
Mott the Hoople HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1973

David Bowie‘s “All The Young Dudes” had revived Mott‘s career, but Ian Hunter “wanted people to know that David didn’t create this band.” Producing themselves, they weathered skepticism and studio fistfights to record this examination of rock as “a loser’s game.” Mott became their greatest success. Listen here.
369
The Smiths, ‘Louder Than Bombs’
The Smiths Louder than Bombs HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire/Rough Trade, 1987

Designed to whet U.S. interest while the Smiths completed a new LP, this dazzling assortment of singles and album tracks became an unintended epitaph when the group dissolved. Its best songs are here, from "Sheila Take a Bow" to "Panic."
368
The Eagles, ‘The Eagles’
Eagles HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Asylum, 1972

This debut created a new template for laid-back L.A. country rock. Behind the band's mellow message – "Take It Easy," "Peaceful Easy Feeling" – was a relentless drive. "Everybody had to look good, sing good, play good and write good," Glenn Frey told Cameron Crowe in Rolling Stone.
367
Madonna, ‘Ray of Light’
Madonna Ray of Light HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Maverick/Warner Bros., 1998

For her first disc as a mother, Madonna and producer William Orbit showed the world that electronica doesn't have to be cold. Songs like the title track and "Nothing Really Matters" are filled with warmth and wonder. Ray also features her best singing ever.
366
Johnny Cash, ‘American Recordings’
cash HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

American, 1994

After years of neglect from the country establishment, Cash returned with this stark acoustic album produced by Rick Rubin. It was a reminder that a giant still walked among us.
365
Rage Against the Machine, ‘Rage Against the Machine’
Rage Against the Machine HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic Associated, 1992

Singer Zack de la Rocha's radical politics found sympathetic muscle in Tom Morello's howling one-guitar army, making a furor unheard since the MC5 and the Clash.
364
The Doors, ‘L.A. Woman’
The Doors L.A. Woman HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1971

Jim Morrison said the Doors wanted to "get back to what we did originally: just be very primitive… very relaxed." Recorded in their rehearsal space with Morrison's mic set up in the bathroom, this was a bluesier, confident Doors. It was the last album Morrison recorded. He died soon after.
363
New Order, ‘Substance’
New Order Substance HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Qwest, 1987

This assemblage of 12-inch singles and remixes charts New Order's tranformation from gloom rockers to electro-disco pioneers. Club hits like "Blue Monday" and "Bizarre Love Triangle" are full of bass melodies that beat-loving guitar bands are still trying to figure out.
362
The Smashing Pumpkins, ‘Siamese Dream’
Smashing Pumpkins Siamese Dream HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Virgin, 1993

On their second disc, the Pumpkins pushed further from alt-rock to a grander, orchestrated sound with multiple guitar parts, strings and Mellotron. Siamese Dream is packed with hits ("Cherup Rock," "Today") and alt-rock followed its lead.
361
OutKast, ‘Stankonia’
outkast stankonia HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

LaFace, 2000

"We call it slumadelic," said Big Boi of OutKast's far-reaching blend of hip-hop, funk, rock and otherworldly sounds. "Ms. Jackson" was something new for rap: an apology to the mother of an ex-girlfriend. And "B.O.B. (Bombs Over Baghdad)" twitches to techno beats and screeching guitar.
360
Buzzcocks, ‘Singles Going Steady’

I.R.S., 1979

Singles collects eight British 45s into a perfect punk album. This Manchester group took the sound of the Ramones and made it jittery and even faster. Songs such as "Everybody's Happy Nowadays" define a world of permanently frustrated desire.
359
Elton John, ‘Honky Chateau’
Elton John Honky Chateau HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Uni, 1972

After a couple of weightier singer-songwriter outings, it was delightful to hear John revel in the simple pop pleasures of "Honky Cat." Written in five days, and using his signature touring band for the first time, Honky Château is a snapshot of an artist loosening up and coming into his full powers.
358
Miles Davis, ‘Sketches of Spain’
Miles Davis Sketches of Spain HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1960

This collaboration between Davis and ­arranger Gil Evans took 15 orchestral sessions to record and six months to assemble. It wasn't an attempt to play Spanish music but to suggest it; the album's muted beauty contains enormous passion. But is it jazz? Davis responded, "It's music, and I like it."
357
The Rolling Stones, ‘Between the Buttons’
Rolling Stones Between the Buttons HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

London, 1967

Andrew Loog Oldham called it their "most English" album. Music-hall piano abuts the psych-soul of "Ruby Tuesday"; the lovely "She Smiled Sweetly" offsets the great Chuck Berry rip, "Miss Amanda Jones."
356
Randy Newman, ’12 Songs’
Randy Newman 12 Songs HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1970

Newman's second disc was his artistic breakout, with Ry Cooder and a few of the Byrds contributing to the loose, confident sound. It's prime caustic, funny Newman – especially the piano rockers "Mama Told Me (Not to Come)" and "Have You Seen My Baby?" and the tormented "Suzanne."
355
The Yardbirds, ‘Having a Rave Up With the Yardbirds’
The yardbirds Having a Rave UP HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1965

Freed from Eric Clapton's blues purism and spurred by Jeff Beck's reckless exhibitionism, the Yardbirds launched a noisy rock & roll avant-garde. This is the bridge between beat groups and psychedelia.
354
Billy Joel, ’52nd Street’
Billy Joel 52nd Street HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1978

The heavy roadwork dictated by the success of The Stranger produced a leaner, rock-oriented follow-up. Like Elton John, Joel assimilated whatever styles (jazz, Latin rhythms) suited his purpose. "I don't want to limit my diet," he said, "sampling only one vegetable in the garden."
353
Kanye West, ‘My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy’

Def Jam/Roc-A-Fella, 2010

Epic hip-hop as messily inspired as Kanye's life, with Elton John pianos, vocoder freakouts, Bon Iver cameos and hilarious insights on Kanye's self-torpedoing genius. 
352
Dire Straits, ‘Brothers in Arms’
Dire Straits Brothers in Arms HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1985

Mark Knopfler started writing "Money for Nothing" when he overheard a New York appliance salesman's anti-rock-star, anti-MTV rant. The song, of course, became a huge MTV hit, and this album shows off Knopfler's incisive songwriting and lush guitar riffs on "Walk of Life" and "So Far Away."
351
Neil Young and Crazy Horse, ‘Rust Never Sleeps’
Neil Young and Crazy Horse Rust never Sleeps HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1979

This live Rust is essential Young, full of delicate acoustic songs and ragged Crazy Horse rampages. Highlights: "My My, Hey Hey" (a tribute to Johnny Rotten) and "Powderfinger," where Young's guitar hits the sky like never before.

350
The Yardbirds, ‘Roger the Engineer (a.k.a. Over Under Sideways Down)’
Yardbirds Roger The Engine HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1966

Jeff Beck was in the Yardbirds only briefly, but here he pushed the Brit blues rockers in a more adventurous, psychedelic direction.
349
Jay-Z, ‘The Black Album’

Roc-A-Fella, 2003

Jay-Z's "farewell record" proves once again that he's "pound for pound . . . the best to ever come around." Hova recounts his mythic rise ("From bricks to billboards, from grams to Grammys") and body-slams his enemies in the walloping rap-rock assault "99 Problems." 
348
Muddy Waters, ‘At Newport 1960’
Muddy Waters At newport 1960 HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Chess, 1960

A stomping live document of the period when Waters' Chicago blues started reaching a wider pop audience. Newport has his classics – "Hoochie Coochie Man," a torrid "Got My Mojo Working" – delivered by a tough, tight band anchored by harp genius James Cotton.
347
Pink Floyd, ‘The Piper at the Gates of Dawn’
Pink Floyd Piper at the Gates of Dawn HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Tower, 1967

"I'm full of dust and guitars," Pink Floyd's Syd Barrett said. Here's what that sounds like. The band's debut is all playful, psychedelic imagery and acid guitars – both poppy ("See Emily Play") and spaced-out freaky ("Interstellar Overdrive").
346
De La Soul, ‘3 Feet High and Rising’

Tommy Boy, 1989

At the end of the Eighties, De La declared a "D.A.I.S.Y. Age," which stood for "Da Inner Sound, Y'All." No gold chains, just samples, skits, jokes and beats, biting everyone from P-Funk to Hall and Oates and Johnny Cash.
345
Talking Heads, ‘Stop Making Sense’
Talking Heads Stop Making Sense HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1984

This soundtrack to Jonathan Demme's 1984 concert film functions as a great band history. It begins with a spare version of "Psycho Killer" and builds to an expansive "Take Me to the River," where the Heads are joined by Parliament great Bernie Worrell. Eighties art funk at its finest.
344
Lou Reed, ‘Berlin’
Lou Reed BErlin HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1973

Reed followed up his breakthrough album, Transformer, with "my version of Hamlet." A bleak song cycle about an abusive, drug-fueled relationship, it's hugely ambitious but also one of the darker records ever made – slow, druggy and heavily orchestrated by producer Bob Ezrin.
343
Meat Loaf, ‘Bat Out of Hell’
Meat Loaf Bat out of Hell HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1977

Meat Loaf's megaselling, megabombastic mega-album was written by pianist Jim Steinman, who'd intended some of the material for a new Peter Pan. This is one of rock's most theatrical, grandiose records, yet Loaf brings real emotion to "Two Out of Three Ain't Bad" and "Paradise by the Dashboard Light."
342
Depeche Mode, ‘Violator’
Depeche Mode violator HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1990

For many Depeche Mode fans, Violator is the crowning glory of the boys' black-leather period. In "Sweetest Perfection," "Halo" and "World in My Eyes," they turn teen angst and sexual obsession into grand synth-pop melodrama, and their attempt at guitar rock resulted in a hit with "Personal Jesus."
341
Moby, ‘Play’
Moby Play HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

V2, 1999

Play was the techno album that proved a Mac could have a soul. Moby took ancient blues and gospel voices and layered them with dance grooves, on songs such as "Porcelain" and "Natural Blues." This was an album with a strange, haunting beauty – especially for advertisers, who mined Play for countless TV commercials
340
Black Flag, ‘Damaged’

SST, 1981

MCA Records refused to release this, denouncing it as "immoral" and "anti-parent." High praise, but Black Flag lived up to it, defining L.A. hardcore punk with violent guitar and the pissed-off scream of Henry Rollins, especially on "TV Party" and "Rise Above." Punks still listen to Damaged, and parents still hate it.
339
Tom Waits, ‘The Heart of Saturday Night’
Tom Waits The Heart of Saturday Night HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Asylum, 1974

By the time Waits made his second album, he'd fully developed his talent for growling, jazzy beatnik gutter tales, and had largely dispensed with the love songs. He does it best on "Diamonds on My Windshield" and "The Ghosts of Saturday Night."
338
Big Brother and the Holding Company, ‘Cheap Thrills’
Janis Joplin Big Brother & the Holding Company Cheap Thrills HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

CBS, 1968

These San Francisco acid rockers were the most simpatico band Janis Joplin ever had, especially when its rough racket backs her up on "Piece of My Heart," perhaps her greatest recording.
337
Jethro Tull, ‘Aqualung’
Jethro Tull Aqualung HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Chrysalis, 1971

Tull were hairy prog-rock philosophers who decried organized religion ("Hymn 43") and modern hypocrisy ("Aqualung") while incorporating flute solos. With several FM-radio hits, this record made Tull into a major arena band. The cover painting gave Seventies kids nightmares.
336
Radiohead, ‘In Rainbows’

Self-released, 2007

After the pay-what-you-like release hoopla died down, what were fans left with? How 'bout the most intense love songs Thom Yorke has ever sung, and a warm live-percussion feel that gives the whole album the vibe of a hippie jam session. One that's taking place at the end of the world, of course. 
335
Soundgarden, ‘Superunknown’
Soundgarden HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

A&M, 1994

They were the Seattle punk scene's headbanging answer to Led Zeppelin II. But they became real songwriters on Superunknown, shaping their angst into grunge anthems like "Black Hole Sun." "[We] realized the importance of melody," said Chris Cornell. "Maybe we've been listening to Bryan Ferry."
334
Graham Parker, ‘Squeezing Out Sparks’
Graham Parker HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Arista, 1979

An angry young crank in the mode of Elvis Costello, this former gas-station attendant rode the wave of U.K. punk. His fifth album combines bar-band rock with New Wave hooks, and his bitter paranoia shines through on every track. 
333
X, ‘Wild Gift’
X Wild Gift HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Slash, 1981

John Doe and Exene Cervenka harmonize about doomed love over L.A. garage-rock thrash, changing the emotional language of punk. They were the White Stripes of their day, a young couple messing with country and blues in gems such as "Adult Books," "Beyond and Back" and "We're Desperate."
332
Richard and Linda Thompson, ‘Shoot Out the Lights’
Richard & Linda Thompson Shoot out the Lights HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Hannibal, 1982

The British folk-rock duo's last album together is a harrowing portrait of a marriage gone bad, made as their marriage collapsed. The catchiest song: "Wall of Death." The scariest: "Walking on a Wire." 
331
The Beatles, ‘Help!’
The Beatles Help! HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1965

The moptops' second movie was a Swinging London goof, but the soundtrack included the classics "You've Got to Hide Your Love Away" and "Ticket to Ride," as well as the lovely "I've Just Seen a Face." Help! didn't break new ground, but it paved the way for the Beatles' next stop: Rubber Soul.
330
Neil Young, ‘Tonight’s the Night’
Neil Young Tonight's the Night HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1975

Young made his darkest, most emotionally frayed album as a tribute to two friends who died from drugs, Crazy Horse guitarist Danny Whitten and roadie Bruce Berry. Young sounds like he's on the edge of a breakdown in the mournful ballads "Tired Eyes" and "Speakin' Out," recorded with a world-weary looseness.
329
James Brown, ‘In the Jungle Groove’
James Brown i n the Jungle Groove HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Polydor, 1986

A compilation of Mr. Dynamite's singles from '69 to '70, including the endlessly sampled "Funky Drummer" and "Give It Up or Turnit a Loose," where Brown drops the heaviest funk of his – or anyone's – life.
328
Sonic Youth, ‘Daydream Nation’
Sonic youth Daydream Nation HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Enigma, 1988

Sonic Youth have had a long, brilliant career making trippy art punk, and this is their triumph. Thurston Moore's and Lee Ranaldo's guitars are like antennae picking up otherworldly signals and channeling them into the scuzzy urban haze of "Teen Age Riot" and "Eric's Trip."
327
Liz Phair, ‘Exile in Guyville’
Liz Phair Exile in Guyville HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Matador, 1993

A studio expansion of Phair's homemade Girlysound cassettes, Exile's frank sex talk caused a stir. But it's the lacerating honesty of tracks such as "Divorce Song" that sticks, and "Fuck and Run" is one of the saddest songs ever written about dreaming of romance and settling for less.
326
The Cure, ‘Disintegration’
The Cure Disintergration HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1989

According to the kids on South Park, this is the best album ever made. According to many depressive Eighties-minded kids, it's the only album ever made – gloppy eyeliner at its grandest. On "Fascination Street," Robert Smith's voice shakes like milk as he makes adolescent angst sound so wonderfully, wonderfully pretty.
325
Eric Clapton, ‘Slowhand’
Eric Clapton Slowhand HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RSO, 1977

"Slowhand" was the nickname given to Clapton by the Yardbirds' manager. On this quintessential album, he mixes candlelit love songs and guitar-hero riffs; "Cocaine" and "Wonderful Tonight" are the hits, but don't overlook "Next Time You See Her," a gentle melody loaded with a death threat to a lover's suitor.
324
David Bowie, ‘Station to Station’
David Bowie Station to Station HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1976

The Kraut-disco title track is where Bowie proclaims himself the Thin White Duke. Thin he was: Station to Station was recorded in a blizzard of cocaine in Los Angeles. "TVC 15" is New Orleans R&B as robotic funk; "Golden Years" is James Brown from outer space, with Bowie's amazing falsetto.
323
The Police, ‘Ghost in the Machine’
The Police Ghost in the Machine HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

A&M, 1981

Here, the previously punkish trio added synth strings and politics, and blew up even further. "Every Little Thing She Does Is Magic" is a pop smart bomb, and "Invisible Sun," about the violence in Northern Ireland, is genuinely moving.
322
Randy Newman, ‘Sail Away’
Randy Newman Sail Away HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1972

Producer Lenny Waronker called him the King of the Suburban Blues Singers. This is Newman's quiet masterpiece, less rock than fuck-you cabaret. Even now, "Political Science" ("Let's drop the big one/And see what happens") is relevant; either Newman is brilliant or we haven't come a long way, baby.
321
Nick Drake, ‘Pink Moon’
Nick Drake Pink Moon HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1972

Drake recorded his last album in a couple of nights, delivered the tapes to Island Records and checked himself into a psychiatric ward. If the music were as dark as the lyrics, it might be unlistenable. But Drake's soothing vocals and unadorned acoustic picking make Moon unfold with supernatural tenderness.
320
Radiohead, ‘Amnesiac’

Capitol, 2001

The greatest sequel since The Godfather: Part II. The second half of the one-two punch Radiohead began with Kid A was smoother on the surface yet just as disorienting underneath, bringing more of the rock guitars that its predecessor held back, but in all kinds of mutated forms. 
319
The Wailers, ‘Burnin’ ‘
Bob Marley and the Wailers Burnin HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1973

Righteous and seriously in the pocket, this is the last Wailers album with Peter Tosh and Bunny Wailer. Bob Marley's soulful cry is rivaled by the sticky organ riffs and fat-bottom beats, and their original version of "I Shot the Sheriff" is far more desperate than Eric Clapton's hit cover.
318
The O’Jays, ‘Back Stabbers’
The O'Jays Back stabbers HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Philadelphia International, 1972

After Vietnam and Watergate, soul music slipped into darkness in the early Seventies. The title track of this Philly-soul album was the writing on the wall: funky and paranoid, much like the times.
317
Pixies, ‘Surfer Rosa’
The Pixies SurferRosa HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

4AD/Elektra, 1988

Smack in between hardcore punk and alternative, it was difficult to make sense of the Pixies' ferocious noise. Their secret weapon was leaping from sweet to screaming, pensive to pummeling: On "Gigantic," Kim Deal sings like Peppermint Patty as the band drives a spike into Eighties rock.
316
The Velvet Underground, ‘The Velvet Underground’
The Velvet Underground HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MGM, 1969

The album that turned folk music inside out. VU began as a black-booted antidote to flower power, so the quiet disillusion, exhaustion and ache here is as explosive as their first album's forbidding howl. 
315
Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers, ‘Damn the Torpedoes’
Tom Petty and the heartbreakers Damn The Torpedoes HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Backstreet, 1979

With hair like Mick Jagger's and a voice like Bob Dylan's in tune, Petty and his bar band de-frilled classic rock: In 1979, "Here Comes My Girl" seemed to keep the promises Jagger et al. forgot they'd made.
314
Lauryn Hill, ‘The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill’
The Miseducation of Lauryn Hill HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Ruffhouse, 1998

Hill took Seventies soul and made it boom and signify to the hip-hop generation on her solo debut. The production was subtle and glorious on heartbreakers such as "Ex-Factor" and the swinging sermon "Doo Wop (That Thing)."
313
Nirvana, ‘Unplugged’
nirvana unplugged in new york HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Geffen, 1994

Nirvana shine brightly on this striking live set because the volume is turned down just low enough to let Kurt Cobain's tortured vulnerability glow. The powerful, reverent covers of Lead Belly, David Bowie and (three) Meat Puppets songs sum up Nirvana as a haunted, theatrical and, ultimately, truly raw band.
312
Jane’s Addiction, ‘Nothing’s Shocking’
Jane's Addiction nothing's shocking HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1988

They thought Led Zeppelin were a funk band, and when they learned this was not true, they carried on anyway. On tracks like "Mountain Song," Jane's major-label debut rewrites pre-Nirvana rock history, reconciling punk and metal with shredding riffs on oceanic songs. And they even had a hit ballad with "Jane Says."
311
Various Artists, ‘The Sun Records Collection’
Sun Records Collection HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Rhino/RCA, 1994

Blues without polish, country without corn, and rockabilly played with brainless abandon from Elvis Presley, Jerry Lee Lewis and Johnny Cash – as well as obscure gems like Bill Justis' aptly named "Raunchy."
310
Red Hot Chili Peppers, ‘Blood Sugar Sex Magik’
red hot chili peppers blood sugar sex magik HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1991

The Peppers' high point – with John Frusciante's energizing, soulful guitar riffs, a huge assist from producer Rick Rubin and the surprise hit ballad "Under the Bridge."
309
Creedence Clearwater Revival, ‘Willy and the Poor Boys’
Creedence Clearwater Revival Willy and the Poor BOys HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Fantasy, 1969

The best of the six albums CCR released between 1968 and 1970; John Fogerty is your chooglin' buddy, even when he's raining down fire and doom on "Effigy."
308
Frank Sinatra, ‘Songs for Swingin’ Lovers!’
Frank Sinatra Songs for swingin' lovers HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1956

An album that meant to deny the rock & roll that was then changing America – and succeeded. The songs were standards, most 10 or 20 years old, but Sinatra and arranger Nelson Riddle showed how timeless jazzy, hip sophistication can be.
307
The Beatles, ‘A Hard Day’s Night’
The Beatles A Hard Days Night HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Parlophone, 1964

The Richard Lester film showed the Beatles' charm. The soundtrack deepened listeners' sense of their musical genius in the off-kilter beauty of John Lennon's "If I Fell," the rockabilly bounce of Paul McCartney's "Can't Buy Me Love," and the great leap forward of George Harrison's guitar work on the 12-string Rickenbacker.
306
Beck, ‘Odelay’
Beck Odelay HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

DGC, 1996

Burrowing into the studio with sampledelic producers the Dust Brothers, Beck came back with a Technicolor version of his Woody Guthrie-meets-Grandmaster Flash vision, demonstrating to his rock peers that turntables had a brighter future than refried grunge.
305
Lucinda Williams, ‘Car Wheels on a Gravel Road’
Lucinda Wiliams Car wheels on a gravel road HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Mercury, 1998

It took three torturous years to finish this alt-country masterwork, but it was worth it. Williams writes songs that explore the rootlessness of American life, with vivid imagery and gravel-guitar beauty.
304
Jeff Buckley, ‘Grace’
Jeff Buckley Grace HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1994

Buckley had a voice like an oversexed angel, and the songs here shimmer and twist. The fierce rocker "Eternal Life" upends Led Zeppelin's take on the blues while honoring it: Instead of a hellhound on his trail, Buckley, who drowned in 1997, evokes immortality bearing down on him.
303
Bob Dylan, ‘John Wesley Harding’
Bob Dylan John Wesley Harding HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1967

Recovering from his 1966 motorcycle crash, Dylan took a left turn into country music and ascetic mysticism, connecting to Nashville through a host of characters from the Bible and America’s rugged history. It’s his most ominous album.
302
Public Enemy, ‘Fear of a Black Planet’
Public Enemy Fear of A Black planet HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Def Jam, 1990

Public Enemy expanded their widescreen vision of hip-hop on their third album, which included the righteous noise of "Fight the Power," the uplifting sentiment of "Brothers Gonna Work It Out" and the agit-funk of "911 Is a Joke."
301
Dolly Parton, ‘Coat of Many Colors’
Dolly Parton Coat of Many Colors HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA Victor, 1971

Parton's starkest, most affecting album. The title track is about wearing rags but staying proud; on "Traveling Man," Parton's mom runs off with her man; on "If I Lose My Mind," her boyfriend has sex with another woman in front of her.

300
Black Sabbath, ‘Master of Reality’
Black Sabbath Master of Reality HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1971

The greatest sludge-metal band of them all in its prime. Paranoid may have bigger hits, but Master of Reality, released a mere six months later, is heavier. The highlight is "Sweet Leaf," a droning love song to marijuana. But the vibe is perfectly summed up by the final track, "Into the Void."
299
Weezer, ‘Weezer’
Weezer HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

DGC, 1994

When it came out, Weezer's debut was merely a cool, quirky power-pop album with a couple of hit singles – "Buddy Holly" and "Undone (The Sweater Song)." But Rivers Cuomo's band influenced a legion of sad-sack punkers. Today, they stand just a step below Nirvana in the alt-rock canon.
298
Kanye West, ‘The College Dropout’

Roc-A-Fella, 2004

On his debut, the self-proclaimed "first [rapper] with a Benz and a backpack" beat the producer-tries-to-rap jinx and broke boundaries others wouldn't acknowledge – from the gospel riot "Jesus Walks" to the Luther Vandross tribute "Slow Jamz."
297
The Mothers of Invention, ‘We’re Only in It for the Money’
Frank Zappa We're Only In It for the Money HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Verve, 1968

A milestone of studio mischief and a merciless satire of anything that pissed Frank Zappa off in flower power's heyday – drippy hippies, the Establishment, whatever.
296
The Smiths, ‘Meat Is Murder’
The Smiths MEat is Murder HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1985

Inspired by Can riffs and bookended by lengthy, brutal songs about corporal punishment and the horrors of the cattle industry, Murder is the darkest entry in the U.K. group's catalog. On "How Soon Is Now?" Morrissey sums up with great pathos and hilarity what a drag it is to be shy. More pathos would come.
295
Leonard Cohen, ‘Songs of Love and Hate’

Columbia, 1971

The Montreal poet-turned-songwriter's most intense album. Cohen strums an acoustic guitar and murmurs about the destructive powers of love, and his tender croak of a voice gives every song an air of hushed drama.
294
MC5, ‘Kick Out the Jams’

Elektra, 1969

It's the ultimate rock salute: "Kick out the jams, motherfuckers!" Recorded live in Detroit by Rob Tyner and his anarchist crew, Kick Out the Jams writhes and hollers with the belief in rock & roll as civil disobedience. The proof: It was banned by a Michigan department store.
293
The Velvet Underground, ‘White Light/White Heat’
The Velvet underground White Light/White Heat HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Verve, 1968

Drowning their songs in guitar fuzz and drone, VU made the most extreme disc in their extreme catalog. "Sister Ray" is 17 minutes of amplifiers screaming.
292
Bob Dylan and the Band, ‘The Basement Tapes’
Bob Dylan and the Band The Basement tapes HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1975

A folk-rock free-for-all recorded in 1967 at the Band's house near Woodstock, New York. The much-bootlegged sessions were finally released eight years later.
291
Talking Heads, ‘Talking Heads: 77’
Talking Heads 77 HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1977

The Heads wore button-down shirts and embraced a tightly wound normality as rebellion. "For a long time, I felt, 'Well, fuck everybody,'" David Byrne told Punk magazine in 1976. "Well, now I want to be accepted." The result was the tense, ingeniously constricted sound of their debut – geek-chic with hooks and charm.
290
Al Green, ‘Call Me’

Hi, 1973

By the time they recorded the graceful, almost perfectly rendered Call Me, Green and producer Willie Mitchell could do little wrong. To hammer that home, Green showed he could rival Ray Charles as an interpreter of country songs on the killer downtempo cover of Hank Williams' "I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry."
289
The Kinks, ‘Something Else by the Kinks’
The Kinks Something else HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1968

The Kinks' most tuneful, reflective album is anchored by two of their greatest songs: "Waterloo Sunset" and "Death of a Clown." The album tanked in the U.S., but it set the table for their pastoral masterpiece, The Village Green Preservation Society.
288
Grateful Dead, ‘Anthem of the Sun’
Grateful Dead Anthem of the Sun HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1968

The Dead's second album was built from multiple live performances and studio takes, which were faded in and out of each track to re-create the alchemy of the band's shows. Jerry Garcia said, "We really mixed [the album] for the hallucinations, you know?"
287
X, ‘Los Angeles’
X Los Angeles HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Slash, 1980

The quintessential L.A. punk band made the first great West Coast punk album with its debut. Los Angeles is best known for its city-defining anthem and the torrid "Johnny Hit and Run Paulene." Produced by Ray Manzarek of the Doors, it also proved that punk and classic rock could hang out together.
286
Al Green, ‘I’m Still in Love With You’
Al Green I'm Still In Love with You HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Hi, 1972

After topping the charts with Let's Stay Together, Green released his second LP of 1972 – an even more sensual experience. "Love and Happiness" is a slow-building masterpiece: His band puts down a subtle groove, and Green adds a mountain of soul.
285
Stevie Wonder, ‘Music of My Mind’
Stevie Wonder Music of My Mind HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Tamla, 1972

Recording after an onerous contract with Motown had expired, a newly empowered Wonder flexed his artistic control, making a relaxed, love-smitten warm-up for the blockbusters to come and playing nearly every funky note on classics such as "Love Having You Around."
284
The Cars, ‘The Cars’
The Cars HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1978

"We used to joke that the first album should be called The Cars' Greatest Hits," said guitarist Elliot Easton. Their debut was arty and punchy enough to be part of Boston's New Wave scene, yet so catchy that nearly every track ("Good Times Roll," "My Best Friend's Girl") landed on the radio.
283
Barry White, ‘Can’t Get Enough’
Barry White Can't Get Enough HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

20th Century, 1974

In 1974, White had three albums on the charts simultaneously, all containing orchestrated hits that fanned the flames of disco fever. But the newly married maestro was also a master balladeer, and "I Can't Believe You Love Me" keeps the boudoir drama coming for 10-plus minutes.
282
Muddy Waters, ‘Folk Singer’
Muddy Waters Folk Singer HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Chess, 1964

Worried that the folk-music fad was luring listeners away from the blues, Chess Records directed Waters to record with acoustic instruments. These sessions – by Waters, Willie Dixon and a young Buddy Guy – went astonishingly well, and this pioneering "unplugged" set is beloved by blues and folk fans alike.
281
Mary J. Blige, ‘My Life’
Mary J. Blige My Life HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1994

Graced by soulful samples and revisions of classic R&B, this Puff Daddy-helmed second album is Blige's most autobiographical. Upbeat jams like "Be Happy" were created during her struggle with substance abuse and a tumultuous relationship. "There's a real bad suicide spirit on there," she admitted.
280
U2, ‘All That You Can’t Leave Behind’
U2 All that you Can't Leave Behind HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Interscope, 2000

"Our best work has been in our thirties," Bono said in 2000. U2's 10th album brought things back to the essentials to grapple with mortality – particularly the gospel-soul ballad "Stuck in a Moment You Can't Get Out Of."
279
David Bowie, ‘Aladdin Sane’
David Bowie Aladdin Sane HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1973

"I think Aladdin was much more in the area of 'Ziggy goes to America,'" Bowie remarked of the Ziggy sequel written largely during his first extensive U.S. tour. "Time" bridges the two albums, but "The Jean Genie" and a raunchy cover of "Let's Spend the Night Together" show a louder, harder, sexier Bowie.
278
Harry Smith, Ed., ‘Anthology of American Folk Music’
Harry Smith Anthology of American Folk Music HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Folkways, 1952

This influential compilation inspired folkies like Pete Seeger and the early Bob Dylan, and it rekindled interest in the blues. Jerry Garcia cut his turntable speed in half in order to master the solos.
277
Janet Jackson, ‘Rhythm Nation 1814’
Janet Jackson Rhythm Nation HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

A&M, 1989

Jackson bought a military suit and ruled the radio for two years with this album. Along with producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis, she fashions a grand pop statement with hip-hop funk, slow jams and even hair metal.
276
Parliament, ‘Mothership Connection’
parliament mothership connection HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Casablanca, 1975

George Clinton leads his Detroit crew of extraterrestrial brothers through a visionary album of science-fiction funk on jams such as "Supergroovalisticprosifunkstication" and "Give Up the Funk."
275
Eminem, ‘The Slim Shady LP’
Eminem The Slim Shady LP

Aftermath, 1999

Here's where Eminem introduced himself as a crazy white geek, the "class-clown freshman/Dressed like Les Nessman." Hip-hop had never heard anything like Em's brain-damaged rhymes on this Dr. Dre-produced album, which earned him respect, fortune, fame and a lawsuit from his mom.
274
Labelle, ‘Nightbirds’
Labelle Nightbirds HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1974

"Lady Marmalade" has one of the funkiest chants in Seventies disco: "Hey, sister, go sister, soul sister, go sister!" Nobody did the disco girl-group thing quite like the ladies of Labelle: They were Funkadelic-meets-the-Supremes, complete with platform heels, silver-lamé spacesuits and songs about New Orleans prostitutes.
273
Smokey Robinson and the Miracles, ‘Going to a Go-Go’
Smokey Robinson and the Miracles Going to a Go-Go HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Tamla, 1965

Motown at its most debonair and sexy. Robinson works his sweeping soul falsetto over unbelievably sad ballads, including "The Tracks of My Tears" and "Ooh Baby Baby," as the Miracles sob along.
272
Sleater-Kinney, ‘Dig Me Out’

Kill Rock Stars, 1997

When drummer Janet Weiss joined singer-guitarists Corin Tucker and Carrie Brownstein on the group's third LP, a riot-grrrl force of nature became one of the world's most potent rock bands. Tucker's indelible vibrato takes off with avenging-angel feminine ferocity.
271
The Beach Boys, ‘The Beach Boys Today!’
THe Beach Boys Today! HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1965

The Beach Boys were still into cars, girls and surfboards, but Brian Wilson was already a genius. He writes sweet California tunes here, and the haunting "She Knows Me Too Well" hits Pet Sounds-deep.
270
The Rolling Stones, ‘Some Girls’
The Rolling Stones Some Girls HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Rolling Stones, 1978

"Keith fuckin' gets busted every year," Mick Jagger fumed. Keith Richards was in drug hell, and the Stones were verging on destruction, but they bounced back with "Miss You," the sleazy "Shattered" and "When the Whip Comes Down." Richards does his best song, "Before They Make Me Run."
269
The Jesus and Mary Chain, ‘Psychocandy’
The Jesus and Mary Chain psychocandy HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1985

Pretty Scottish boys surfing a wave of doom and gloom and enjoying every moment of it. The Jesus and Mary Chain's debut is a decadent alt-rock masterpiece of bubblegum pop – with "Just Like Honey," "My Little Underground" and "Never Understand" – drowned in feedback.
268
Paul Simon, ‘Paul Simon’

Columbia, 1972

Simon's first album after the breakup of Simon and Garfunkel was a tour de force of songcraft, storytelling, virtuosic guitar picking and upper-register vocal dazzle. It also forecast the fluid internationalism of Graceland with the reggae of "Mother and Child Reunion" and the samba-inflected "Me and Julio Down by the Schoolyard."
267
The Who, ‘Quadrophenia’
The Who Quadrophenia HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1973

The album that brought back Vespa scooters, parkas and uppers: Pete Townshend drew on the Who's roots in the London mod scene of the early Sixties and composed this expansive, messy rock opera about a lonely teenage boy looking for love in the city. It gets even better when you check out the movie.
266
Blood, Sweat and Tears, ‘Child Is Father to the Man’
Blood Sweat & Tears Child is Father to the Man HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1968

Organist Al Kooper formed this eclectic rock-jazz collective, putting horns up front with the guitars. On Tim Buckley and Randy Newman covers, and the hard-bitten original "I Can't Quit Her," it worked.
265
Ray Charles, ‘The Genius of Ray Charles’
The Genius of Ray Charles HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1959

Charles spent the Fifties working hard to pioneer his own sound: fusing jazz, gospel and the blues into the new soul style that reshaped American music. But on Genius he relaxes for some easy-swinging pop, with big-band arrangements.
264
Grateful Dead, ‘Workingman’s Dead’
Grateful Dead Working Man's Dead HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1970

The Dead strip down for eight spooky country and folk tunes that rival the best of Bob Dylan, especially on the morbid "Black Peter" and "Dire Wolf."
263
Tracy Chapman, ‘Tracy Chapman’
Tracy Chapman HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1988

Somehow, this young folk singer caught everyone's ear in the hair-metal late Eighties. Chapman had spent time strumming her acoustic guitar for spare change on the streets around Boston, and her gritty voice and storytelling made "Fast Car" hit home.
262
Crosby, Stills and Nash, ‘Crosby, Stills and Nash’
Crosby, Stills & Nash HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1969

Jimi Hendrix called CSN "groovy, Western-sky music." The trio first combined their golden-hippie harmonies on this debut, featuring "Marrakesh Express" and the seven-minute "Suite: Judy Blue Eyes."
261
Grateful Dead, ‘American Beauty’
grateful dead American beauty HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1970

The Dead were never better in the studio than on the down-home stoner country of American Beauty. Released just six months after the folky classic Workingman's Dead [see No. 264], it has some of the band's most beloved songs, including "Box of Rain" and "Friend of the Devil."
260
Willie Nelson, ‘Stardust’
willie nelson stardust HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1978

Stardust is Nelson's love song to old-time American music: At the height of his country popularity, the crooner digs up his favorite Tin Pan Alley standards – "Georgia on My Mind," "Unchained Melody," "Don't Get Around Much Anymore" – making yesterday's hits swing as if he had just come up with them in his La-Z-Boy.
259
Janet Jackson, ‘The Velvet Rope’
janet jackson the velvet rope HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Virgin, 1997

Janet Jackson left behind her girl-next-door image forever with The Velvet Rope, an album of sexy, confessional, freewheeling hip-hop soul. She pairs Joni Mitchell and Q-Tip in "Got 'Til It's Gone" and does house music on "Together Again," but the shocker is her girl-girl version of Rod Stewart's "Tonight's the Night."
258
The Kinks, ‘The Village Green Preservation Society’
The Kinks are the village green preservation society HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1968

Having shed their early garage-rock grit in favor of more baroque arrangements, the Kinks made one of their loveliest albums, Ray Davies' nostalgic ode to British pastoral life. The sound is delicate, like a picture of a small town vanishing before your eyes.
257
Whitney Houston, ‘Whitney Houston’
whitney Houston HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Arista, 1985

She had been a model and a nightclub singer when she cut this smooth R&B debut. Her vocal gifts and technique are astounding; even slick tracks such as "Greatest Love of All" stick. Best song: "How Will I Know," perky synth funk evoking Houston's family friend Aretha Franklin.
256
Kraftwerk, ‘Trans-Europe Express’
kraftwerk trans-europe express HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1977

This German group's robotic synthesizer grooves influenced electro-disco hitmakers, experimentalists such as Brian Eno and rappers including Afrika Bambaataa, who lifted the title track for "Planet Rock."
255
Metallica, ‘Metallica’
Metallica HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1991

One of the bestselling metal albums ever, created with Bon Jovi producer Bob Rock and led by "Enter Sandman" and the ballad "Nothing Else Matters." "It's scary to look out and see couples hugging during that song," frontman James Hetfield said. "'Oh, fuck, I thought this was a Metallica show.'"
254
Otis Redding, ‘Dictionary of Soul’
Otis Redding Dictionary of Soul HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Volt, 1966

"Try a Little Tenderness" was a Bing Crosby tune from the Thirties until Redding turned it into pure Memphis soul. On Dictionary, he does the same with "Tennessee Waltz" and the Beatles' "Day Tripper," as well as his own ballads "Fa-Fa-Fa-Fa-Fa (Sad Song)" and "My Lover's Prayer."
253
Bruce Springsteen, ‘The River’
Bruce Springsteen The River HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1980

Springsteen said it took him five albums to begin writing about real relationships, "people tryin' to find some sort of consolation in each other." The River balances those stories with E Street romps through bar-band R&B, rockabilly and epic rock.
252
Jay-Z, ‘The Blueprint’
Jay-Z The Blueprint HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

If Frank Sinatra had been born a Brooklyn rapper, The Blueprint is the album he would have made. It's all flash and bravado, with Jay-Z dissing rivals, talking smack about his troubles with the cops and flossing hard with ladies all around the world.
251
David Bowie, ‘Low’
David Bowie Low HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1977

Moving to West Berlin to kick cocaine, Bowie hooked up with producer Brian Eno. Low was the first of the trilogy of albums they made, full of electronic instrumentals and quirky funk like "Sound and Vision." During this time, Bowie also produced Iggy Pop's Lust for Life and The Idiot, the high point of Iggy's solo career.

250
Jay-Z, ‘Reasonable Doubt’
Jay-Z reasonable doubt HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Roc-A-Fella, 1996

"The studio was like a psychiatrist's couch for me," Jay-Z told Rolling Stone, and his debut is full of a hustler's dreams and laments. It established Jay as the premier freestyle rapper of his generation and includes a filthy guest appearance from a 16-year-old Foxy Brown on "Ain't No Nigga."
249
R.E.M., ‘Automatic for the People’
R.E.M. Automatic for the People HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1992

"It doesn't sound a whole lot like us," warned guitarist Peter Buck, but that was the point of R.E.M.'s eighth album. Largely acoustic, and with string parts arranged by Led Zeppelin's John Paul Jones, this musical left turn finds a haunted beauty.
248
Ornette Coleman, ‘The Shape of Jazz to Come’
Ornette Coleman The Shape of Jazz to Come HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1959

Coleman's sound was so out-there, one audience at an early gig threw his sax over a cliff. He pioneered free jazz: no chords, no harmony, any player can take the lead – music as lyrical as it is demanding, particularly on "Lonely Woman."
247
Grateful Dead, ‘Live Dead’
Grateful Dead Live Dead HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1969

After two expensive studio albums put them $100,000 in debt, this live set was more than just cheap, it was pivotal. For the Dead, the magic happened onstage, as demonstrated by the glorious 23-­minute jam-outs on "Dark Star" and a raging, 15-minute cover of Bobby Bland's "(Turn On Your) Love Light."
246
The Mothers of Invention, ‘Freak Out!’
Frank Zappa and the Mothers of Invention Freak Out! HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Verve, 1966

A master guitarist and provocateur, Frank Zappa made more than 60 albums, but the first was perhaps the most groundbreaking. The double disc declared the arrival of a visionary weirdo who dabbled in doo-wop, pop-song parody, protest tunes, art rock and avant-garde classical.
245
Jerry Lee Lewis, ‘All Killer, No Filler!’
Jerry Lee Lewis Anthology All Killer No Filler! HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Rhino, 1993

Lewis is famous for his frenzied, piano-pumping Sun sides of the late Fifties, yet his career as a country hitmaker lasted decades. Listen to "What Made Milwaukee Famous (Has Made a Loser Out of Me)," and you might agree with the Killer that "Elvis was the greatest, but I'm the best."
244
Eminem, ‘The Marshall Mathers LP’
Eminem The Marshall mathers LP HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Aftermath, 2000

Before his second major-label LP, Eminem was a shock rapper with a sense of humor; after Mathers, he was the voice of a generation. Songs like "The Real Slim Shady" created a vast, pissed-off audience. And no one could deny the narrative heft of "Stan."
243
Black Sabbath, ‘Black Sabbath’
Black Sabbath HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1970

Recorded in a single 12-hour blurt by a hippie-leaning former blues band, this lumbering debut conjured up a new, sludgy sound: the birth pains of heavy metal. The slide guitar on "The Wizard" and the grungy boogie of "Wicked World" would influence not only future metal spawn but even the sound of Nirvana.
242
Run-D.M.C., ‘Run-D.M.C.’

Profile, 1984

"It's good to be raw," said Run, and the metallic guitar powering "Rock Box" proved it. Run-D.M.C.'s debut ditches early rap's party rhymes to codify B-boy style and make history, from the way they dress to their hard beats to the everyday subject matter of "It's Like That."
241
The Replacements, ‘Let It Be’
The Replacements Let it Be HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Twin/Tone, 1984

Copping a Beatles title was cheeky; attaching it to a post-punk masterpiece was a sign of maturity. Songs like "I Will Dare" sizzle with ambition. Mixing punk and country with wry lyrics, "Unsatisfied" sounds like Paul Westerberg demanding more of himself and of his band. He got it.
240
Steely Dan, ‘Can’t Buy a Thrill’
Steely Dan Can't Buy A Thrill HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1972

Working as hired songwriters by day, Donald Fagen and Walter Becker rehearsed this debut in executives' offices by night. "We play rock & roll, but we swing," said Becker. For proof, check the cool lounge-jazz rhythms of "Do It Again" and the hot guitar of "Reelin' in the Years."
239
Madonna, ‘Like a Prayer’
Madonna Like A Prayer HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1989

"I like the challenge of merging art and commerce," Madonna said. She won artistic recognition with her most personal set of songs, including "Till Death Do Us Part" and "Oh Father"; commerce with "Express Yourself" and the title track, whose video had the Vatican talking about blasphemy.
238
Howlin’ Wolf, ‘Howlin’ Wolf’
Howlin' WOlf HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Chess, 1962

Chicago blues at its raunchy best, "The Rocking Chair Album" features an outrageous set of sex songs written by Willie Dixon, including "Shake for Me," "The Red Rooster" and "Back Door Man." In 1971, on The London Howlin' Wolf Sessions, Wolf finally taught an enraptured Eric Clapton how to play "The Red Rooster."
237
The Who, ‘The Who Sings My Generation’
The Who Sing My Generation HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Decca, 1966

The Who debuted in maximum R&B mode: power-chorded reductions of James Brown ballads. When a manager badgered Pete Townshend into beefing up his laid-back demo of "My Generation," the resulting explosion knocked a hole in the future.
236
Jackie Wilson, ‘Mr. Excitement!’
Jackie Wilson Mr. Excitement! HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Rhino, 1992

Wilson was a knockout live performer who made R&B that rocked and sang ballads with a voice, said arranger Dick Jacobs, "like honey on moonbeams." The highlight of this three-disc set – which spans from the Fifties to the Seventies – is the endless build of "(Your Love Keeps Lifting Me) Higher and Higher."
235
Patsy Cline, ‘The Ultimate Collection’
Patsy Cline The Ultimate Collection HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

UTV, 2000

She died in a plane crash at 30, but Cline made her mark as one of country's great singers. "Walkin' After Midnight" and "I Fall to Pieces" also made the pop charts, and her version of "Crazy" was a godsend to struggling writer Willie Nelson.
234
Simon and Garfunkel, ‘Bookends’
Simon & Garfunkel Bookends HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1968

Paul Simon called this "the quintessential Simon and Garfunkel album." It is certainly far-ranging – a mostly dark, beautifully written voyage that includes both the epic "America" and the Graduate theme, "Mrs. Robinson." The duo produced the rec­ord themselves, with brilliant restraint.
233
The Byrds, ‘Mr. Tambourine Man’
the Byrds Mr. Tambourine Man HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1965

"Wow, man, you can even dance to that!" said Bob Dylan on hearing the Byrds' harmonized electric-12-string treatments of his material. This debut defined folk rock with L.A. studio savvy and ringing guitars.
232
The Kinks, ‘The Kink Kronikles’
The Kinks Kink Kronikles HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1972

Covering 1966 to 1970, this double-disc set anthologizes the second act in the Kinks' venerable career. Observational narratives such as "Waterloo Sunset" reveal Ray Davies to be a master miniaturist.
231
Queen, ‘A Night at the Opera’
Queen A Night at the Opera HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1975

Freddie Mercury wanted Queen to be "the Cecil B. DeMille of rock," and this is where the band let its over-the-top tendencies loose – especially on "Bohemian Rhapsody," the most operatic rock song ever.
230
Bonnie Raitt, ‘Nick of Time’
Bonnie Raitt Nick of Time HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Captiol, 1989

After being dumped by her previous label, veteran blues rocker Raitt exacted revenge with this multiplatinum Grammy-award winner. Producer Don Was helped her sharpen the songs without sacrificing any of her slide-guitar fire. And as Raitt herself pointed out, her 10th try was "my first sober album."
229
Aerosmith, ‘Toys in the Attic’
Aerosmith Toys in the Attic HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1975

This is where Aerosmith perfected their raunchy blues-rock sound, with guitarist Joe Perry laying down some of the Seventies' most indelible riffs on "Walk This Way" and "Sweet Emotion," and Steven Tyler stepping up with scads of dirtbag swagger and unforgettable songs about his favorite topic: sex.
228
Eric B. and Rakim, ‘Paid in Full’
Eric B. & Rakim Paid in Full HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

4th and Broadway/Island, 1987

Laid-back, diamond-sharp: Old-school titan Rakim may still lead the race for Best Rapper Ever, and this album is a big reason why. Paid in Full was one of the first hip-hop records to fully embrace Seventies funk samples on stone classics such as "I Know You Got Soul" and the title track.
227
Pixies, ‘Doolittle’
The Pixies Doolittle HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

4AD/Elektra, 1989

Kurt Cobain himself acknowledged the Pixies' influence on the soft/loud dynamic that powered "Smells Like Teen Spirit." Doolittle is a mix of the band's earlier hardcore storms, Black Francis' self­described "stream of unconsciousness" rants, and the strange melodicism and surf-metal guitar that defined its creepy magic.
226
Bruce Springsteen, ‘Nebraska’
Bruce Springsteen NEbraska HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1982

Recorded on a four-track in Springsteen's bedroom, the songs on Nebraska were stark, spooky acoustic demos that he decided to release "bare." Packed with shadowy hard-luck tales of underdogs, it ends with "Reason to Believe," one of those songs where Springsteen's search for faith inspires faith itself.
225
Green Day, ‘American Idiot’

Reprise, 2004

The Nineties' irrepressible punk brats grew up with a bang, proving they could take on the kind of gargantuan old-school concept album that nobody else seemed to have the guts to try anymore. Billie Joe Armstrong raged against the political complacency of Bush-era America with ferocity and a Who-size sense of grandeur.
224
Neil Diamond, ‘The Neil Diamond Collection’
The Neil Diamond Collection HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1999

This pop-rock star's melodramatic delivery is a guilty pleasure that never gets less pleasurable – or less guilty – than when he's belting "Sweet Caroline," "Cherry, Cherry" or "I Am … I Said."
223
U2, ‘War’
U2 War HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1983

U2 were on the cusp of becoming one of the Eighties' most important groups when their third album came out. It's the band's most overtly political album, with songs about Poland's Solidarity movement ("New Year's Day") and Irish unrest ("Sunday Bloody Sunday") charged with explosive, passionate guitar rock.
222
Professor Longhair, ‘New Orleans Piano’
Professor Longhair New Orleans HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1972

There may never have been a funnier, sunnier piano player. His rolling, rumba-tinged style, yodeling vocals and whistling make tracks such as "Tipitina" swinging blasts of joy. New Orleans Piano collects Atlantic singles from 1949 to 1953, including the ultimate party anthem, "Mardi Gras in New Orleans."
221
My Bloody Valentine, ‘Loveless’

Sire, 1991

A shoegazer masterpiece, the fourth MBV album reportedly cost £250,000 to make. It was worth every penny, expanding the possibilities of noise-as-melody by combining dizzying guitar drone and Bilinda Butcher’s ethereal vocals.
220
The Meters, ‘Look-Ka Py Py’
The Meters Look-ka Py PY HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Josie, 1970

The New Orleans rhythm killers' second album exemplifies their foundational groove. These instrumentals – sampled by rappers including Nas and N.W.A – are funk of the gods, with George Porter Jr.'s monster bass and the incredible off-the-beat drumming of Ziggy Modeliste.
219
Beastie Boys, ‘License to Ill’
Beastie Boys Licensed to ill HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Def Jam, 1986

Recorded when the New York rap trio were barely out of high school, Licensed to Ill remains a revolutionary combination of hip-hop beats, metal riffs and some of the most exuberant, unapologetic smart-aleck rhymes ever made. It became the bestselling rap album of the Eighties.
218
The Smiths, ‘The Queen Is Dead’
The Smiths The Queen Is Dead HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire/Rough Trade, 1986

The original kings of British mope rock could have earned that title on the basis of this album alone. The Smiths' most tuneful record is full of emulsifying rage ("The Queen Is Dead"), epic sadness ("There Is a Light That Never Goes Out") and strummy social commentary ("Frankly, Mr. Shankly").
217
Bobby Bland, ‘Two Steps From the Blues’
Bobby Bland Two Steps from the Blues HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Duke, 1961

Bland's stirring, guttural howl is epitomized by "Little Boy Blue" and "Cry, Cry, Cry," which erase any distinction between blues and soul. "I Pity the Fool" and "Lead Me On" may just be some of the purest, most heartbroken singing you'll ever hear.
216
Bo Diddley, ‘Bo Diddley/Go Bo Diddley’
OLYMPUS DIGITAL CAMERA

MCA, 1990

Diddley's influence is inestimable, from the off-kilter thump of "Pretty Thing" to his revved-up blues singing. This album – a repackaging of his first two records – has many of his best singles, including "I'm a Man" and "Who Do You Love?"
215
New York Dolls, ‘New York Dolls’
The New York Dolls HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Mercury, 1973

"Could you make it with Frankenstein?" they asked, not kidding. Glammed-out punkers the New York Dolls snatched riffs from Chuck Berry and Fats Domino and fattened them with loads of attitude and reverb. Produced by Todd Rundgren, songs like "Personality Crisis" and "Bad Girl" drip with sleaze and style.
214
Ike and Tina Turner, ‘Proud Mary: The Best of Ike and Tina Turner’
The Best of Ike and Tina Turner Proud Mary HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

EMI, 1991

On early singles like "A Fool in Love," Tina Turner has wild power and raw vulnerability. Then come the rock & roll covers, the Seventies funk and "River Deep, Mountain High." Amazing.
213
The Rolling Stones, ‘Tattoo You’
Rolling Stones Tattoo You HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Virgin, 1981

Tattoo You was lean, tough and bluesy – the Stones relying on their strengths, as if they'd matured into the kind of surefire bluesmen they'd idolized as kids. It spent nine weeks at Number One on the strength of "Start Me Up," in which Mick Jagger snuck the line "You make a dead man come" onto the radio.
212
Pavement, ‘Crooked Rain, Crooked Rain’
Pavement Crooked Rain Crooked Rain HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Matador, 1994

Pavement's second album was about love and rock & roll, with bouncy pop, stretches of lyrical noise and "Range Life," which slagged the Smashing Pumpkins while searching for the right way to settle down.
211
Pink Floyd, ‘Wish You Were Here’
Pink Floyd Wish You Were Here HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1975

The follow-up to The Dark Side of the Moon was another essay on everyday lunacy – capped by the liquid-rock suite "Shine On You Crazy Diamond," a poignant allusion to errant ex-member Syd Barrett. 
210
Neil Young With Crazy Horse, ‘Everybody Knows This Is Nowhere’
Neil Young with Crazy Horse Everybody Knows This is Nowhere HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1969

Young and Crazy Horse had been together for only a couple of months when they cut Nowhere – and the jammy outing sounds that way, in the best sense possible.
209
Pearl Jam, ‘Ten’
Pearl jam Ten HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1991

When their debut came out, Pearl Jam were competing with Nirvana in a grunge popularity contest they were bound to lose. Yet Ten was just as key in reshaping hard rock: Eddie Vedder's shaky, agonized growl and Mike McCready's wailing guitar solos on "Alive" and "Jeremy" push both songs to the brink and back again.
208
Cat Stevens, ‘Tea for the Tillerman’
Cat Stevens Tea for the Tillerman HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

A&M, 1970

Chamber-pop arrangements made this the British folkie's most ambitious album. And his toughest: "Wild World" and "Hard-Headed Woman" find Stevens condemning his ex, Patti D'Arbanville – who later shacked up with Mick Jagger.
207
Santana, ‘Abraxas’
Santana Abraxas HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1970

"Black Magic Woman," the Top Five hit from Abraxas, is definitive Santana: Afro-Latin grooves and piercing lyrical psychedelic blues guitar. It was a cover of a Fleetwood Mac song written by one of Carlos Santana's guitar heroes, Peter Green. The album's other hit was also a cover: Tito Puente's "Oye Como Va."
206
Prince, ‘Dirty Mind’
Prince Dirty Mind HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1980

A mix of slinky funk, synth-driven rock, jittery pop and sexual innuendo, Dirty Mind is a New Wave R&B masterwork. It includes the world's merriest done-me-wrong song, "When You Were Mine," and the incest ditty "Sister." "I wasn't being deliberately provocative," Prince said. "I was being deliberately me."
205
Cream, ‘Wheels of Fire’
Cream Wheels of Fire HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Polydor, 1968

Half studio album, half live album, Wheels of Fire not only has the definitive Cream tune – "White Room" – but it is also incontrovertible proof of Eric Clapton's interpretive mastery. "Crossroads," a live reworking of Robert Johnson's haunted blues classic, features one of the most blazing guitar solos ever recorded.
204
Bob Dylan, ‘Modern Times’

Columbia, 2006

This is history repeating itself – in Dylan's specific echoes of Slim Harpo and Memphis Minnie, and in his refusal to bend even in the harshest winds. "Heart burnin', still yearnin'," he sings in "Ain't Talkin'," the album's last song, a proud walk through a scorched Earth that Woody Guthrie would have recognized in an instant.
203
Michael Jackson, ‘Bad’
Michael Jackson Bad HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1987

The feverishly anticipated follow-up to Thriller added more hits to Jackson's collection: "Bad," "The Way You Make Me Feel" and "Man in the Mirror." He also began venting some of his darker emotions in the violent fantasies of "Smooth Criminal" and the paranoia of "Dirty Diana."
202
Simon and Garfunkel, ‘Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme’
Simon &Garfunkel Parsley, Sage, Rosemary and Thyme HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1966

The duo's third album yielded uptempo hits like "The 59th Street Bridge Song" and the fine English-major folk of "For Emily" and "The Dangling Conversation."
201
Nine Inch Nails, ‘The Downward Spiral’
Nine Inch Nails The Downward Spiral HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Nothing/Interscope, 1994

Holing up in the one-time home of Manson-family victim Sharon Tate, Trent Reznor made an overpowering meditation on NIN's central theme: control. 

200
AC/DC, ‘Highway to Hell’
AC/DC Highway to Hell HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1979

Bon Scott was a bourbon-swilling force of nature, and by AC/DC's fourth LP, he and guitarist Angus Young had become a one-two punch with killer songs (like the bulldozing title track) to match. Scott's wicked ways caught up with him, however: He was dead six months after Highway hit shelves.
199
The Strokes, ‘Is This It’
The Strokes IS this It HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 2001

The debut from these mod ragamuffins was a blast of guitar-combo racket that made New York's shadows sound vicious and exciting again. Is This It mixed Velvet Underground grime and skinny-tie New Wave jangle with Julian Casablancas' Lower East Side dispatches – sometimes acidic, always full of great melody.
198
Little Walter, ‘The Best Of’

Chess, 1957

This Muddy Waters sideman attacked the harmonica with the authority of the bop sax players he loved, bringing a dynamic new sound to Chicago blues. In 1952, his own "Juke" topped the R&B charts. But he had no control of his personal life; he died at 37 after being injured in a street fight.
197
R.E.M., ‘Murmur’
R.E.M. Murmur HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

I.R.S., 1983

The founding document of alternative rock, released just as Gen X was heading off to college. Though “technically limited,” according to co-producer Don Dixon, R.E.M. packed their songs with cathartic mystery. Peter Buck’s guitar chimes and Michael Stipe unspools his low-talker lyrics like they constitute a new language.
196
Various Artists, ‘Nuggets: Original Artyfacts From the First Psychedelic Era, 1965-1968’
Nuggets HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1972

This 27-song collection of short, fun brutally simple Sixties garage rock, compiled by critic Lenny Kaye, was proto-punk manna in the prog-clogged Seventies.
195
John Mayall With Eric Clapton, ‘Blues Breakers’
John Mayall Blues Breakers with Eric Clapton HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

London, 1966

Ex-Yardbird Eric Clapton's solos here inspired his "Clapton Is God" cult. The band expertly covers Robert Johnson and Freddie King, and blows up Ray Charles' "What'd I Say" with a long drum solo that predicts Cream. 
194
Lou Reed, ‘Transformer’
Lou Reed Transformer HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1972

David Bowie counted the former Velvet Underground leader as a major inspiration – and paid Reed back by producing his biggest album. Transformer had glam flash courtesy of guitarist Mick Ronson, and "Walk on the Wild Side" brought drag queens and hustlers into the Top 20.
193
Green Day, ‘Dookie’
Green Day Dookie HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1994

The album that jump-started the Nineties punk-pop revival. Singer-guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong boiled suburban boredom into airtight, three-minute shots like "Welcome to Paradise," "Basket Case" and the infectious smash "Longview" – which Armstrong described as "cheap self-therapy from watching too much TV."
192
The Flying Burrito Brothers, ‘The Gilded Palace of Sin’
The Flying Burrito Brothers HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

A&M, 1969

A hugely influential country-rock statement – concocted by ex-Byrds Gram Parsons and Chris Hillman – of L.A. hillbilly anthems, God-fearing hippie soul and achingly beautiful two-part harmonies.
191
The Stooges, ‘Fun House’

Elektra, 1970

With garage-savvy ex-Kingsmen keyboardist Don Gallucci producing their second album, the Stooges' relentless "troglodyte groove" was allowed to run psychotically rampant. "I stick it deep inside," Iggy Pop growls on "Loose." And the punk torpedoes like "T.V. Eye" make good on that promise.  
190
Elvis Presley, ‘From Elvis in Memphis’
Elvis Presley From Elvis in Memphis HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA Victor, 1969

"I had to leave town for a little while," Presley sings in the first track. This record announced he was back. With a crack crew of Memphis musicians, Presley masterfully tackles country, gospel, soul, pop and – on "In the Ghetto" – message songs.
189
Quicksilver Messenger Service, ‘Happy Trails’
Quicksilver Messenger SErvice Happy trails HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1969

The definitive live recording of the late-Sixties ballroom experience: This San Francisco acid-blues band's second album captures its twin guitarists in bright flight, and composed intricacies like the studio epic "Calvary" prove that psychedelia was about more than just tripping out.
188
Buffalo Springfield, ‘Buffalo Springfield Again’
Buffalo Springfield Again HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ATCO, 1967

Their second record has masterful L.A. folk rock from Stephen Stills, pioneering country rock from Richie Furay and two Neil Young gems: the raw "Mr. Soul" and the suitelike "Broken Arrow."
187
Peter Gabriel, ‘So’
Peter Gabriel HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Geffen, 1986

Gabriel got funky on the 1982 single "Shock the Monkey." It took him four years to follow up, but So delivered with the visceral "Sledgehammer," the upbeat "Big Time," the gothic love ballad "In Your Eyes" and the inspirational "Don't Give Up," a duet with Brit art thrush Kate Bush.
186
Sly and the Family Stone, ‘Fresh’
Sly and the Family Stone Fresh HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1973

As the Seventies unfurled, Stone became progressively dissolute. But he had one more ace up his sleeve: the intoxicating "If You Want Me to Stay," surrounded here by idiosyncratic gestures like a ragged take on Doris Day's "Que Sera, Sera."
185
The Stooges, ‘The Stooges’
The Stooges HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1969

Fueled by "a little marijuana and a lotta alienation," Michigan's Stooges savagely gave the lie to hippie idealism. Ex-Velvet Underground member John Cale produced a primitive debut wherein Iggy Stooge (né James Osterberg) snarled seminal punk classics such as "I Wanna Be Your Dog," "No Fun" and "1969." 
184
Madonna, ‘The Immaculate Collection’
Madonna The immaculate collection HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire/Warner Bros., 1990

A perfect Madonna CD: You get timeless pop such as "Holiday," provocations like "Papa Don't Preach," dance classics like "Into the Groove" and a then-new Lenny Kravitz-produced sex jam, "Justify My Love," which samples Public Enemy.
183
Willie Nelson, ‘Red Headed Stranger’
Willie Nelson Red Headed Stranger HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

 Columbia, 1975

This trailblazing concept album became one of Nelson's biggest hits – a lyrically ambitious, musically stripped-down, riveting and heartfelt tale of murder and infidelity.
182
Fleetwood Mac, ‘Fleetwood Mac’
Fleetwood Mac HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1975

Mick Fleetwood, John McVie and his missis Christine's first album with California couple Lindsey Buckingham and Stevie Nicks generated big radio songs such as "Say You Love Me" and "Rhiannon" and patterned the rich harmonies and sheer melodies they'd perfect on Rumours. 
181
Bob Marley and the Wailers, ‘Natty Dread’
Bob Marley & the wailers Natty Dread HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1974

The first Wailers album to give Marley top billing was multifaceted rebel music – from the call-to-arms opening, "Lively Up Yourself" (about dancing or revolution or both), to the gospel-flavored "No Woman, No Cry," an anthem of struggle and hope. 
180
The Rolling Stones, ‘The Rolling Stones, Now!’
The rolling STones Now! HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

London, 1965

A charming exuberance pervades the Stones' third U.S. release, with its hot-rod takes on Chuck Berry, Bo Diddley, Willie Dixon and Muddy Waters. And their "Heart of Stone" introduces a crucial Stones element into the mix: menace.
179
Abba, ‘The Definitive Collection’
Abba The Defintitve Collection HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Universal, 2001

These Swedish pop stars became the world's biggest group in the Seventies. Global hits like the double-divorce drama "Knowing Me, Knowing You" and the war-torn "Fernando" undercut sparkly melodies with Nordic despair.
178
Curtis Mayfield and the Impressions, ‘The Anthology 1961-1977’
Curtis Mayflield The Anthology HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1992

Mayfield taught sociocultural awareness while dispensing fine ballads ("Gypsy Woman"), inspirational anthems ("People Get Ready," "Move On Up") and edgy street narratives ("Superfly"). 
177
Funkadelic, ‘One Nation Under a Groove’
HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART Parliament Funkadelic One Nation Under A Groove

Warner Bros., 1978

Funkadelic's first million-seller perfectly distills George Clinton's gospel of mind-altering groove music – from the monster title track to the cosmic make-out soul of "Into You" and the scatological philosophizing of "The Doo Doo Chasers." 
176
Aerosmith, ‘Rocks’
Aerosmith Rocks HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1976

After Toys in the Attic proved that Aerosmith were more than a Stones caricature, the band flexed its muscles on the boastfully (and aptly) named Rocks, a buffalo stampede of rave-ups and boogies. In an era of arena bombast, songs like "Back in the Saddle" and "Last Child" kept it low to the ground and swinging.
175
The Carpenters, ‘Close to You’
The Carpenters Close to you HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

A&M, 1970

With their lush music and thoroughly wholesome image, Richard and Karen Carpenter epitomized the early-Seventies mainstream. Years later, as soft rock became a hipster touchstone, the chaste elegance of ballads like "Close to You" and "We've Only Just Begun" influenced many cooler, scruffier indie bands.
174
Bob Dylan, ‘Desire’
Bob Dylan Desire HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1976

In typical Dylan style, the follow-up to Blood on the Tracks was mostly bashed out in one all-night New York session, fueled by tequila. "Sara," his account of his crumbling marriage, and the politically charged "Hurricane" highlight the last great album he'd make for many years
173
Todd Rundgren, ‘Something/Anything?’
Todd Rundgren Something/Anything? HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Bearsville, 1972

On this tour-de-force double album, Rundgren demonstrates his command of the studio, unfurling his falsetto over a kaleidoscope of rock genres – including the white pop-soul of "Hello It's Me."
172
Rod Stewart, ‘Every Picture Tells a Story’
Rod Stewart Every Picture Tells A Story HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Mercury, 1971

Stewart's best disc is loose and warm, rocking hard with mostly acoustic instruments. "Mandolin Wind" is the moving ballad; the title tune is a boozy romp; "Maggie May" went Number One.
171
The Byrds, ‘The Notorious Byrd Brothers’
The Byrds The Notorious Byrd Brothers HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1968

The horse on the cover (reportedly) replaced David Crosby, who'd just been fired. But despite the internal drama, the Byrds made a warm, gentle comedown album for Sixties children waking up to the morning after the Summer of Love.
170
The Who, ‘Live at Leeds’
The who Live at Leeds HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Decca, 1970

Faced with the task of following up Tommy [see No. 96], the Who just cranked up their amps and blasted. There's no finesse, just the pure power of a band able to play as loud as it wants. When the Who blew up Eddie Cochran's "Summertime Blues" to Godzilla-like proportions, they invented Seventies arena rock.
169
Bob Marley and the Wailers’ ‘Exodus’
Bob Marley & The Wailers Exodus HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1977

As the title suggests, this album wasn't recorded in Jamaica; after Marley took a bullet in a 1976 assassination attempt, he relocated the Wailers to London. But tracks such as "Jamming" and "Three Little Birds" are still suffused with the deep essence of reggae and life at home.
168
Elvis Costello, ‘My Aim Is True’
Elvis Costello My Aim is True HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1977

Costello obsessively listened to The Clash while recording his debut. And though the songs are more pub rock than punk, they're full of punk's verbal bite; the murder mystery "Watching the Detectives" and the poisoned-valentine ballad "Alison" established Costello as one of the sharpest and nastiest lyricists of his generation.
167
Metallica, ‘Master of Puppets’
Metallica Master of Puppets HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1986

Metallica's third album has a lyrical theme: manipulation. "Drugs controlling you," singer-guitarist James Hetfield said. It also has a sonic theme: really loud guitars, played at warhead speed. When the band slows down on "Welcome Home (Sanitarium)," it just emphasizes the unrelenting nature of the rest of the songs.
166
Elvis Costello and the Attractions, ‘Imperial Bedroom’
Elvis Costello and the Attractions Imperial Bedroom HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Chess, 1982

Costello wanted his music to be as complex as his lyrics (which increasingly documented marital tension). So for his seventh album he and Beatles engineer Geoff Emerick experimented with an adult sonic palette (accordions, Mellotron, horns) that highlighted grown-up stress and sorrow.
165
Marvin Gaye, ‘Let’s Get It On’
Marvin Gaye Let's Get it On HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Motown, 1973

On this album, Gaye meditated on the gap between sex and love and how to reconcile them – an adult version of the Motown tunes he had built his career on. It’s some of the most gorgeous music he ever made, resplendent with sweet strings and his clear-throated crooning.
164
Linda Ronstadt, ‘The Very Best of Linda Ronstadt’

Rhino, 2002

So very SoCal (her band became the ­Eagles), Ronstadt was more empathetic interpreter than songwriter. But she could knock out a pop song – check "Long Long Time," where she sounds like a girl next door with a voice that can peel chrome.
163
Prince, ‘1999’
Prince 1999 HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1982

"I didn't want to do a double album," Prince said, "but I just kept on writing. Of course, I'm not one for editing." The second half of 1999 is exceptional sex-obsessed dance music; the first half is the best fusion of rock and funk anyone had achieved to that date, and it lays out the blueprint for Prince's next decade.
162
Radiohead, ‘OK Computer’
Radiohead OK Computer HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1997

OK is where Radiohead began pulling at their sound like taffy, not worrying if it was still "rock." The result is a slow, haunting album with unforgettable tracks such as "Karma Police" and "Paranoid Android." Guitarist Jonny Greenwood arranged white-noise strings, and Thom Yorke made alienation feel alluring.
161
Otis Redding, ‘The Dock of the Bay’
Otis Redding The Dock of the Bay HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1968

Redding recorded his Monterey Pop-inspired "soul-folk" experiment "(Sittin' on) The Dock of the Bay" four days before he died in a plane crash. The posthumous album guitarist Steve Cropper compiled out of unreleased sessions is essential soul.
160
T. Rex, ‘Electric Warrior’
T.Rex HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1971

Marc Bolan cast a spell over all of England with this album, giving his Tolkienesque hippie music a glammed-out update. This was rock that thrusted, quivered and recklessly employed metaphors equating cars with sex ("You got a hubcap diamond star halo").
159
Kiss, ‘Alive!’
Kiss Alive! HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Casablanca, 1975

A double live LP, cut largely in Detroit (plus studio overdubs), Alive! was Kiss' breakthrough, with hot versions of "Strutter" and "Rock and Roll All Nite." "I really enjoy myself onstage: prancing around, shaking my ass," said singer Paul Stanley. "I am entertaining myself up there."
158
Elton John, ‘Captain Fantastic and the Brown Dirt Cowboy’
Elton John Captain Fantastic HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1975

This self-mythologizing spectacle about John and lyricist Bernie Taupin features "Someone Saved My Life Tonight" – from the time Taupin talked John out of suicide.
157
Joy Division, ‘Closer’
Joy Division Closer HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Factory, 1981

This is one of the most chilling albums ever made, with droning guitars, icy bass lines and stentorian vocals. And that's not even considering the lyrics, about singer Ian Curtis' epilepsy and failing marriage. When Curtis hanged himself at age 23 on May 18th, 1980, Closer officially became the stuff of rock legend.
156
The Beastie Boys, ‘Paul’s Boutique’
Beastie Boys Paul's Boutique HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1989

For their second album, the Beasties hired the Dust Brothers, a production team that provided some of the best samples ever on wax – from the Ramones to the Funky 4+1. The title is a goof on Abbey Road, which was Paul McCartney's boutique; like that LP, it stitches together song fragments in a way rarely seen before or since.
155
The Pretenders, ‘Pretenders’
Pretenders HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1980

After years of writing record reviews and hanging with the Sex Pistols, Chrissie Hynde put together a band as tough as she was. Pretenders is filled with no-nonsense rock like "Brass in Pocket," a meditation on ambition and seduction that stands as one of New Wave's greatest radio moments.
154
Howlin’ Wolf, ‘Moanin’ in the Moonlight’
Howlin' Wolf Moanin' in the Moonlight HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Chess, 1959

Wolf's sound – a fierce growl mixed with explosive playing by guitar geniuses Willie Johnson and Hubert Sumlin – was huge and eerie, and this compilation taught the Rolling Stones, Eric Clapton and the rest of England the ways of the blues.
153
A Tribe Called Quest, ‘The Low End Theory’

Jive, 1991

Many connected the dots between hip-hop and jazz, but this LP drew the whole picture. As legendary stand-up bassist Ron Carter gets dope, Tribe discourse on everything from music biz to sexual politics – and the groove keeps getting deeper.
152
The B-52’s, ‘The B-52’s’
The B-52's HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1979

The B-52's sounds like high school friends cramming their in-jokes, wacky sounds and private nicknames into a New Wave LP. Nobody could resist the campy, arty funk. And with the toy instruments and bouffant hair, the B-52's' thrift-store image was as colorful as their music – which, given "Rock Lobster," was pretty colorful.
151
Arcade Fire, ‘Funeral’

Merge, 2004

Love, loss, forced coming-of-age and fragile hope: The debut from this seven-­member band touched on these themes as it defined indie music of the 2000s. It's surging orchestral rock that actually rocked – and found solace, and purpose, in communal celebration.

150
Bruce Springsteen, ‘Darkness on the Edge of Town’
Bruce Springsteen Darkness on the Edge of Town HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1978

This was the sound of Springsteen's hard-won realism breaking through, chronicling working-class dreams and despair on cuts like "The Promised Land" and "Racing in the Street," his greatest-ever car song.
149
Santana, ‘Santana’
Santana HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1969

This debut unveiled Carlos Santana's singular mix of Latin rhythms, rock guitar and lyrical blues. The 22-year-old's guitar work was fueled by psychedelics. "[Drugs] made me aware of splendor and rapture," he said. Santana did the same thing for fans.
148
Led Zeppelin, ‘Houses of the Holy’
Led Zeppelin Houses of the Holy HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1973

On Album Five, Zeppelin got into a groove. "D'yer Mak'er" is their version of reggae, and "The Crunge" is a tribute to James Brown. The band also indulged its cosmic side with "The Rain Song" (featuring one of Robert Plant's most amazing vocals) and the Viking death chant "No Quarter." 
147
Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young, ‘Deja Vu’
Crosby Stills Nash & Young Dejavu HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1970

Neil Young transformed the folk-rock CSN into a powerhouse – offering pop idealism (Graham Nash's "Teach Your Children"), militant blues (David Crosby's "Almost Cut My Hair") and vocal-choir gallop (Stephen Stills' "Carry On"). The achingly plaintive "Helpless" is prime early Young.
146
Jefferson Airplane, ‘Surrealistic Pillow’
Jefferson Airplane Surrealistic Pillow HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1967

The Airplane's heady debut is a hallucinatory distillation of folk-blues vocals, garage-­rock guitar and crisp pop songwriting. Grace Slick's vocal showcases, "White Rabbit" and "Somebody to Love," were Summer of Love smash hits, and Marty Balin's spectral "Today" is still the greatest ballad of San Francisco's glory days.
145
Steely Dan, ‘Aja’
Steely Dan aja HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ABC, 1977

Steely Dan's meticulously crafted sixth album was Walter Becker and Donald Fagen's stab at becoming mainstream jazz-pop superstars. And thanks to sweet, smart, slippery tracks like "Deacon Blues" and "Peg," they did just that – and won a Grammy for Best Engineered album too.
144
N.W.A., ‘Straight Outta Compton’
N.W.A. Straight Outta Compton HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Ruthless, 1998

"Do I look like a motherfucking role model?" Ice Cube asks on "Gangsta Gangsta": You do not, sir! Cube's rage, Eazy-E's thug nasty and Dr. Dre's police-siren beats slammed America into a new hip-hop era.
143
Dr. John, ‘GRIS-Gris’
Dr. John The Night Tripper Gris-gris HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ATCO, 1968

In the Sixties, New Orleans piano player Mac Rebennack moved to L.A., encountered California psychedelia, rechristened himself Dr. John, the Night Tripper, and made this swamp-funk classic. GRIS-Gris blends New Orleans R&B, voodoo chants and chemical inspiration.
142
Phil Spector, ‘A Christmas Gift for You’
Phil Spector Christmas HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Philles, 1963

The best holiday album in pop-music history. Ronnie Spector melts "Frosty the Snowman" and takes the innocence out of "I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus." And it all comes in a vortex of Spector's exhilarating Wall of Sound production.
141
B.B. King, ‘Live at the Regal’
B.B. King Live at the Regal HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ABC, 1965

Recorded in Chicago in 1964, as a new audience of white rock fans was discovering the blues, Live at the Regal is B.B. King's definitive live set. His guitar sound is precise and powerful, driving emotional versions of some of his most influential songs, including "Every Day I Have the Blues" and "How Blue Can You Get."
140
Blondie, ‘Parallel Lines’
Blondie parallel lines HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Chrysalis, 1978

New Wave's big pop breakthrough, Parallel Lines is a perfect synthesis of raw punk edge, Sixties-pop smarts and downtown-New York glamour. Debbie Harry created a new kind of rock & roll sex appeal that brought New York demimonde style to the mainstream. Madonna was surely watching.
139
The Meters, ‘Rejuvenation’
The MEters Reuvenation HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1974

New Orleans producer Allen Toussaint built hit records with a taut Morse-code style of rhythm guitar rooted in the marching-band and party beats of the Crescent City. That funky discipline defines this LP; the Meters perfect a balance of funk, rock and Dixie R&B on gems such as "People Say" and "Hey Pocky A-Way."
138
Dr. Dre, ‘The Chronic’

Death Row, 1992

Dr. Dre had already taken gangsta rap mainstream with N.W.A. On The Chronic, he funked up the rhymes even further with samples of old George Clinton hits, a smooth bass-heavy production and the laid-back delivery of then-unknown rapper Snoop Doggy Dogg.
137
The Replacements, ‘Tim’
The Replacements Tim HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1985

On the Mats' major-label debut, singer-guitarist Paul Westerberg segues brilliantly from heroic power-chord swagger ("Bastards of Young") to shabby contemplation ("Here Comes a Regular"). No pre­Nirvana band did it better.
136
Elton John, ‘Greatest Hits’
Elton John Greatest hits HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1974

This single-disc collection – released during John's creative and commercial peak – includes nearly every Top 10 single he had during that era, from "Your Song" to "Don't Let the Sun Go Down on Me." It documents why the piano man was one of the biggest-selling pop stars of the Seventies.
135
Pavement, ‘Slanted and Enchanted’
Pavement Slanted & Enchanted HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Matador, 1992

The quintessential American indie-rock album. The playing is relaxed, the production primitive, the lyrics quirky, the melodies seductive. But the noise-streaked sound is intense, even as Stephen Malkmus displays his love of Seventies-AM pop.
134
The Notorious B.I.G., ‘Ready to Die’
The Notorious BIG Ready to Die HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Bad Boy, 1994

B.I.G. (a.k.a. Biggie Smalls) took the gritty life experience of his hard-knock Brooklyn youth and crammed it into Ready to Die, hip-hop's greatest debut. "Big Poppa" is the hit sex jam, "Juicy" made you laugh as you danced, and on "Things Done Changed" and "Everyday Struggle," he relates gangsta tales in a voice as thick as his waistline.
133
Bruce Springsteen, ‘The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle’
Bruce Springsteen The Wild, the Innocent & the E Street Shuffle HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1973

Springsteen's second album shook the "New Dylan" tag and applied his Jersey-bar-band skills to some of the loosest, jazziest, funniest songs he'd ever write – such as "Rosalita" and "Kitty's Back."
132
Original Soundtrack, ‘Saturday Night Fever’
saturday night fever HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RSO, 1977

Disco at its megaplatinum apex: The Bee Gees' silvery-helium harmonies melt into creamily syncopated grooves, and the Trammps' hot-funk assault "Disco Inferno" and Tavares' yearning "More Than a Woman" affirm disco's black-R&B roots.
131
Black Sabbath, ‘Paranoid’
black sabbath paranoid HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1970

Sabbath ruled for bummed-out Seventies kids, and nearly every metal and extreme rock band of the past four decades owes a debt to Tony Iommi's granite-fuzz guitar, the Visigoth rhythm machine of Bill Ward and Geezer Butler, and Ozzy Osbourne's agonized bray in "Paranoid," "Iron Man" and "War Pigs."
130
Television, ‘Marquee Moon’
Television marquee moon HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1977

Television were the guitar mystics on the CBGB scene, mixing the howl of the Velvet Underground, the epic song lengths of Yes and the double-helix guitar sculpture of Quicksilver Messenger Service. Their debut was as exhilarating in its lyrical ambitions as the Ramones' first album was in its brutal simplicity.
129
Talking Heads, ‘Remain in Light’
Talking Heads Ramain in Light HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1980

On this New Wave watershed, the avant-punk avatars became polyrhythmic pop magicians. David Byrne and Co. combined the thrust of P-Funk, the kinky grooves of Afropop and the studied adventurousness of producer Brian Eno – and they still had a pop hit with "Once in a Lifetime."
128
Iggy and the Stooges, ‘Raw Power’
Iggy Pop Raw power HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1973

Iggy Pop had dyed silver hair and a hard-drug habit when David Bowie helped get the rudderless Stooges a deal with Columbia. Pop and new guitarist James Williamson responded with hellbent ferocity on punk eruptions like "Search and Destroy" and "Gimme Danger."
127
The Byrds, ‘Younger Than Yesterday’
The Byrds Younger than Yesterday HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1967

Amid internal strife, the former Next Beatles made their first mature album, a blend of space-flight twang and electric hoedown infused with the glow of 1967 yet cut with realism.
126
Bob Marley and the Wailers, ‘Catch a Fire’
Bob Marley and the wailers catch a fire HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1973

Marley's major-label debut expanded his audience beyond Jamaica without diluting his bedrock reggae power. Producer and label boss Chris Blackwell remixed the original Jamaican sessions for international ears, but the Wailers' ghetto rage comes across uncut.
125
Janis Joplin, ‘Pearl’
Janis Joplin Pearl HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1971

On Pearl, Joplin made a solo album worthy of her Texas blues-mama wail. Whether singing hippie gospel or country soul, she never sounded more intimate and assured. "Me and Bobby McGee" was a Number One single, but Joplin didn’t get to enjoy her triumph. She died of a drug overdose before the album was finished.
124
Moby Grape, ‘Moby Grape’
Moby Grape HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1967

San Francisco rock at its '67 peak, this is genuine hippie power pop. Moby Grape sang like demons and wrote crisp songs packed with lysergic country-blues excitement, while the band's three guitarists – Jerry Miller, Peter Lewis and Skip Spence – created a network of lightning.
123
Run-DMC, ‘Raising Hell’
Run DMC Raising Hell HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Arista, 1986

Working with producer Rick Rubin, the Queens crew made an undeniable album that forced the mainstream to cross over to hip-hop. Run and DMC talked trash over Jam Master Jay's killer mixology, and they bum-rushed MTV with a vandalistic cover of Aerosmith's "Walk This Way," featuring Steven Tyler and Joe Perry.
122
Original Soundtrack, ‘The Harder They Come’
Jimmh Cliff in The Harder They Come HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Mango, 1973

This album took reggae worldwide. The film's star, Jimmy Cliff, sings four songs, including the hymn "Many Rivers to Cross," and greats like Desmond Dekker, the Melodians, and Toots and the Maytals showed the richness of the new beat.
121
Sly and the Family Stone, ‘Stand!’
Sly and the Family Stone Stand! HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1969

Funk-rock-soul party politics at its most inclusive and exciting – Sly Stone rides the bonfire momentum of the civil rights movement in "Stand!" and "You Can Make It If You Try" without denying the intrinsic divisions that threatened civil war (see "Don't Call Me Nigger, Whitey").
120
The Byrds, ‘Sweetheart of the Rodeo’
The Byrds Sweetheart of the Rodeo HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1968

Driven by new member Gram Parsons, the Byrds nailed a bold Nashville classicism, dressing Bob Dylan and Merle Haggard songs in steel guitar and rock & roll drive. The results set the stage for country rock.
119
Etta James, ‘At Last!’
Etta James At Last! HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Argo, 1961

1955's "Roll With Me, Henry" made this self-described "juvenile delinquent" a sexually precocious teenage star. Six years later, Etta James bloomed into a fiery interpreter on this spellbinding LP. Hitting the pop and R&B charts, she created a new vocal model: the crossover diva.
118
Kanye West, ‘Late Registration’

Roc-A-Fella/Def Jam, 2005

Here, Kanye really started showing off. Ranging from triumphal autobiography ("Touch the Sky") to witty club pop ("Gold Digger"), James Bond themes to Houston hip-hop, his second disc remade the musical landscape in his own oddball image
117
Derek and the Dominos, ‘Layla and Other Assorted Love Songs’

ATCO, 1970

Deeply in love with his best friend George Harrison's wife, Eric Clapton came up with an album of love-tortured blues that gets a kick from guest Duane Allman, the rare guitarist who could challenge him.
116
The Rolling Stones, ‘Out of Our Heads’
The Rolling Stones Out of Our Heads HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ABKCO, 1965

Here's where the Stones started to leave the R&B and blues covers behind. Their fourth album in America featured three defining Jagger–Richards originals, each a masterpiece of libidinal menace: "The Last Time," the gently vicious "Play With Fire" and "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction," a song that is the very definition of riff.
115
The Who, ‘The Who Sell Out’
The Who Sell Out HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Decca, 1968

The Who's first concept album was a tribute to the U.K.'s offshore pirate-radio stations – strung together with mock commercials ("Heinz Baked Beans") and genuine radio jingles. It's their funniest record, and the mini rock opera, "Rael," gave a hint of epic things to come.
114
Cream, ‘Disraeli Gears’
Cream Disraeli Gears HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ATCO, 1967

Cream's sharpest, most linear album focused its instrumental explorations into colorful pop songs: "Strange Brew" (slinky funk), "Dance the Night Away" (trippy jangle), "Tales of Brave Ulysses" (a wah-wah freakout) and the hit "Sunshine of Your Love," driven by Ginger Baker's relentless Native American tribal beat.
113
Joni Mitchell, ‘Court and Spark’
Joni Mitchell Court and Spark HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Asylum, 1974

Smooth and straight-ahead, Court and Spark is the biggest record of Mitchell's career. Working with saxophonist Tom Scott's fusion group, L.A. Express, Mitchell settles into a folk-pop-jazz groove that remains a landmark of breezy sophistication, particularly on the Top 10 single "Help Me."
112
The Mamas and the Papas, ‘If You Can Believe Your Eyes and Ears’
The Mamas and the papas If you can believe your eyes and ears HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1966

The First Family of Cali-folk rode their gorgeous four-part harmonies to pop stardom – but Papa John Phillips' sunny melodies had a seductively dark undercurrent.
111
Radiohead, ‘The Bends’
Radiohead The BEnds HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1995

The first half of Nineties rock was shaped by Nirvana, and the second half was dominated by Radiohead. Their second album married a majestic and somber guitar sound to Thom Yorke's anguished-choirboy vocals, drawing on the epic grandeur of U2 and the melancholy of the Smiths.
110
The Velvet Underground, ‘Loaded’
The Velvet Underground Loaded HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Cotillion, 1970

Lou Reed quit the Velvets just before their fourth album was finished. But he left behind two perfect hits ("Sweet Jane," "Rock & Roll") and a record that highlights the doo-wop roots and Sun Records crackle buried in VU's noir-guitar maelstrom.
109
The Rolling Stones, ‘Aftermath’
The Rolling Stones Aftermath HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

London, 1966

The first Stones album completely written by Jagger–Richards was full of bad-boy songs about Swinging London's overnight stars, groupies, hustlers and parasites. It's got tough riffs ("It's Not Easy"), girls seeking kicks ("Under My Thumb"), zooming psychedelia ("Paint It Black") and baroque-folk gallantry ("I Am Waiting").
108
David Bowie, ‘Hunky Dory’
David Bowie Hunky Dory HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1971

Recorded when he was 24, Bowie's first great album was a visionary blend of gay camp, flashy rock guitar and saloon-piano balladry. Bowie marked the polar ends of his artistic ambitions with tribute songs to Bob Dylan and Andy Warhol while inventing – and perfecting – a new style of rock & roll glamour.
107
Sam Cooke, ‘Portrait of a Legend’
Sam Cooke Portrait of a Legend HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ABKCO, 2003

Cooke was a gospel star who crossed over to rock & roll, helping to invent soul music. This career-spanning collection peaks with the civil rights anthem "A Change Is Gonna Come," a posthumous hit after he was shot to death at an L.A. motel in 1964.
106
Ramones, ‘Rocket to Russia’
ramones Rocket to Russia HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1977

The Ramones' third album took the gospel of three chords, a jackhammer beat and ripped denim beyond New York. Rocket to Russia was a polished bottling of the quartet's CBGB-stage napalm, bursting with Top 40 classicism and deepened by the lonely-boy poignancy of Joey Ramone's vocals.
105
Ray Charles, ‘Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music’
Ray Charles Modern Sounds in Country and Western Music HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ABC-Paramount, 1962

Charles' biggest-selling record was the audacious racial-boundary-smasher its title promised, applying gospel grit and luscious soul-pop strings to standards by Hank Williams and Eddy Arnold.
104
James Taylor, ‘Sweet Baby James’
James Taylor Sweet Baby James HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1970

Taylor went through a private hell on the way to recording his hugely successful second album – including two stays in a psychiatric institution (a fellow patient's suicide inspired "Fire and Rain"). But the confessional lyrics, spare melodicism and quiet strength in his voice made the album a model of Seventies folk-pop healing.
103
John Coltrane, ‘Giant Steps’
John Coltrane Giant Steps HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1960

Coltrane made two giant steps in 1959: playing on Miles Davis' Kind of Blue and recording his first classic. He played flying clusters of notes that declared new possibilities for jazz improvisation and predicted the ferocious, harmonically open lyricism of his mid-Sixties albums.
102
Cream, ‘Fresh Cream’
Cream Fresh Cream HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ATCO, 1966

Bassist Jack Bruce, drummer Ginger Baker and guitarist Eric Clapton – rock's first supergroup – put a psychedelic pop spin on the blues. Their debut is tight and concise, a blueprint for the band’s onstage jams, where they stretched these tunes into quarter-hour improvisations.
101
Frank Sinatra, ‘In the Wee Small Hours’
Frank Sinatra In the Wee small Hours HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Captiol, 1955

The first set of songs Sinatra recorded specifically for an LP sustains a midnight mood of loneliness and lost love – it’s a prototypical concept album. Listen close and you'll hear the soft intake of his breath.

100
The Zombies, ‘Odessey and Oracle’

Columbia, 1969

Odessey and Oracle wasn't released in the U.S. until 1969 – two years after it was recorded and the Zombies had broken up. But its baroque psychedelic-pop arrangements still felt fresh – combining the adventure of Sgt. Pepper with the concision of British Invasion pop. And "Time of the Season" went on to become a Number Three hit.
99
Sly and the Family Stone, ‘There’s a Riot Goin’ On’
Sly & The Family Stone There's A Riot Going On HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1971

Sly's 1969 album Stand! burst with optimism. But he met the Seventies with implosive, numbing, darkly self-referential funk that was deeply compelling in its anguish over dreams deferred.
98
Elvis Costello, ‘This Year’s Model’
Elvis Costello This Years Model HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1978

Costello's second album, and his first with the Attractions, is his most "punk" – not in any I-hate-the-cops sense but in his emotionally explosive writing and his backing band's vicious gallop. "Radio, Radio," the broadside against vanilla-pop broadcasting, distills his righteous indignation: Elvis versus the world. And Elvis wins.
97
Bob Dylan, ‘The Freewheelin’ Bob Dylan’
The Freewheelin' Bob Dylan HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1963

On Dylan's second album, the poetry and articulate fury of his lyrics and the simple, compelling melodies in songs like "Masters of War" and "Blowin' in the Wind" transformed American songwriting. Not bad for a guy who had just turned 22.
96
The Who, ‘Tommy’
Tommy The Who HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Decca, 1969

"Rock opera" is one way to describe this exploration of childhood trauma, sexual abuse, repression and spiritual release. Here's another way: the slash and thunder of "My Generation" blown wide open. Driven by Keith Moon's hellbent drumming, the Who surge and shine, igniting the drama in Pete Townshend's melodies.
95
Miles Davis, ‘Bitches Brew’
Miles Davis Bitches Brew HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1970

Davis wanted to connect his music to the audience of Jimi Hendrix and Sly Stone. The result was this double album of jazz-rock fusion, cut with an electric orchestra that included saxophonist Wayne Shorter and guitarist John McLaughlin. It’s full of visceral thrills and the brooding darkness Davis brought to everything he touched.
94
Hank Williams, ’40 Greatest Hits’

Polydor, 1978

When he died on New Year's Day 1953, at age 29, in the back of a Cadillac, Williams was the biggest star in country music. His vocal twang, lovesick ballads and long-gone-daddy romps left their stamp on decades of rock & roll – from Elvis to Dylan to the Replacements to Beck.
93
Prince, ‘Sign ‘o’ the Times’
Prince Sign of the Times HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Paisley Park, 1987

The most expansive R&B record of the Eighties is best known for the apocalyptic title track, the funk banger "Housequake" and the gorgeous "If I Was Your Girlfriend." Yet the simplest moments are unforgettable: the guitar plea "The Cross" and the Stax revamp on "Slow Love."
92
Buddy Holly, ’20 Golden Greats’
Buddy Holly The Crickets 20 Golden Greats HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1978

The country-weened Texan put his trademark hiccup on springy rockabilly, tight rave-ups and orchestral ballads – an eclecticism that had a huge impact on the future Beatles. "Rave On," "Peggy Sue" and "Not Fade Away" made Holly one of rock's first great singer-songwriters.
91
Elton John, ‘Goodbye Yellow Brick Road’
Elton John Goodbye Yellow Brick Road HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

MCA, 1973

Elton John compared this double album to the Beatles' White Album, and why not? By this point he was the most consistent hitmaker since the Fab Four, and soon enough he would be recording with John Lennon. Everything about Goodbye Yellow Brick Road is supersonically huge, from the Wagnerian-operalike combo of "Funeral for a Friend" and "Love Lies Bleeding" to the electric boots and mohair suit of "Bennie and the Jets." "Saturday Night's Alright for Fighting" is strutting rock & roll, "Candle in the Wind" pays tribute to Marilyn Monroe, and the title track harnesses the fantastic imagery of glam to a Gershwin-sweet melody.
Stevie Wonder90
Stevie Wonder, ‘Talking Book’

Tamla, 1972

"I don't think you know where I'm coming from," Stevie Wonder warned Motown executives in 1971. "I don't think you can understand it." Indeed, the two albums Wonder released in 1972 – Music of My Mind and Talking Book – rewrote the rules of the Motown hit factory. Talking Book was full of introspection and social commentary, with Wonder producing, writing and playing most of the instruments himself. But it's still radiant pop. "Superstition" and "You Are the Sunshine of My Life" were Number One singles; "Big Brother" is political consciousness draped in a light melody: "You've killed all our leaders/I don't even have to do nothin' to you/You'll cause your own country to fall."
89
Dusty Springfield, ‘Dusty in Memphis’
Dusty Springfield Dusty in Memphis HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1969

London-born Dusty Springfield was a great soul singer hidden inside a white British pop queen – racking up Motown-style hits such as "I Only Want to Be With You" – when Atlantic producer Jerry ­Wexler brought her way down South, to Memphis, to make this album. She was so intimidated by the idea of recording with session guys from her favorite Aretha Franklin and Wilson Pickett hits that she never actually managed to sing a note there ("I always wanted to be Aretha," she recalled years after). Her vocals were overdubbed later, when the sessions moved to New York. But the result was blazing soul and sexual honesty ("Breakfast in Bed," "Son of a Preacher Man") that transcended both race and geography.
88
Johnny Cash, ‘At Folsom Prison’
JOhnny Cash At Folsom Prison HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1968

By the late Sixties, Johnny Cash was ignored by country radio and struggling for a comeback. At Folsom Prison was the gold-selling shot in the arm that revived his career. A year later, he was writing liner notes for Bob Dylan's countrified Nashville Skyline and logging four weeks at Number One with his second prison album, At San Quentin. But At Folsom Prison is essential Cash. Backed by his tough touring band, including fellow Sun Records alum Carl Perkins on guitar, Cash guffaws his way through "Cocaine Blues," "25 Minutes to Go" (a countdown to an execution) and "Folsom Prison Blues," with its line about shooting a man just to watch him die. The 2,000 inmates in attendance roar their approval.
87
Pink Floyd, ‘The Wall’
Pink Floyd The Wall HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1979

Pink Floyd's most elaborately theatrical album was inspired by their own success: the alienating enormity of their tours after The Dark Side of the Moon [see No. 43]. As the band played arenas in 1977, bassist­lyricist Roger Waters first hit upon the wall as a metaphor for isolation and rebellion. He finished a demo of the work by July 1978; the double album then took the band a year to make. Rock's ultimate self-pity opera, The Wall is also hypnotic in its indulgence: the totalitarian thunder of "In the Flesh?," the suicidal languor of "Comfortably Numb," the Brechtian drama of "The Trial" and the anti-institutional spleen of the album's unshakable disco hit, "Another Brick in the Wall, Pt. 2." Rock-star hubris has never been more electrifying.
86
Bruce Springsteen, ‘Born in the U.S.A.’
Bruce Springsteen Born in the U.S.A. HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1984

Bruce Springsteen wrote many of these songs in a fit of inspiration that also gave birth to the harrowing Nebraska [see No. 226]. "Particularly on the first side, [Born] is actually written very much like Nebraska," he said. "The characters and the stories, the style of writing – except it's just in the rock-band setting." It was a crucial difference: The E Street Band put so much punch into the ironic title song that millions misheard it as mere flag-waving instead (conservative pundit George Will wrote a rhapsodic column titled "A Yankee Doodle Springsteen"). The immortal force of the album is in Springsteen's frank mix of soaring optimism and the feeling of, as he put it, being "handcuffed to the bumper of a state trooper's Ford."
85
Aretha Franklin, ‘Lady Soul’
Aretha Franklin Lady Soul HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1968

Aretha Franklin's third Atlantic album in less than two years is another classic, with "(You Make Me Feel) Like a Natural Woman," "Ain't No Way" and a slinky version of the Rascals' "Groovin'." It was released in a year of triumph and turbulence for Franklin: Although she made the cover of Time, the magazine reported details of her rocky marriage to Ted White, then her manager. But Franklin channeled that frenzy into performances of funky pride and magisterial hurt. Among the best: the grand-prayer treatment of Curtis Mayfield's "People Get Ready," the revved-up longing of "Since You've Been Gone (Sweet Sweet Baby)" and her explosive anguish on the hit cover of Don Covay's "Chain of Fools."
84
Aretha Franklin, ‘I Never Loved a Man the Way I Loved You’
Aretha Franklin I never loved a man the way I love you HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1967

Aretha Franklin's Atlantic debut is the place where gospel collided with R&B and rock & roll to make soul music as we know it today. The Detroit­born preacher's daughter was about $80,000 in debt to her previous label, Columbia – where she had recorded a series of somewhat tame early-Sixties albums – when Atlantic producer Jerry Wexler signed her in 1966. "I took her to church," Wexler said, "sat her down at the piano, and let her be herself." She immediately cut the album's title hit, a slow fire of ferocious sexuality, while her storefront­church cover of Otis Redding's "Respect" – Franklin's first Number One pop single – became the marching song for the women's and civil rights movements.
83
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, ‘Axis: Bold as Love’
The Jimi Hendrix Experience Axis: Bold As Love HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1968

Jimi Hendrix's first album remade rock & roll with guitar magic that no one had ever dreamed of; his second album had even more sorcery. It started with some musings on extraterrestrial life, then got really far-out: jazzy drumming, funky balladry, liquid guitar solos, dragon­fly heavy metal and the immortal stoner's maxim from "If 6 Was 9": "I'm the one who's gonna have to die when it's time for me to die, so let me live my life the way I want to." All over the album, Hendrix was inventing new ways to make the electric guitar roar, sing, talk, shriek, flutter and fly. And with the delicate "Little Wing," he delivered one of rock's most cryptic and bewitching love songs.
82
Neil Young, ‘Harvest’
Neil Young Harvest HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1972

Harvest yielded Neil Young's only Number One hit, "Heart of Gold," and helped set the stage for the Seventies soft-rock explosion – both James Taylor and Linda Ronstadt sing on the album. Along with Young, they were in Nashville to appear on Johnny Cash's ABC-TV variety show the first weekend that Harvest was being cut with an odd group of accomplished session musicians that included bassist Tim Drummond, who had played with James Brown (Young's bandmates Crosby, Stills and Nash also appeared on the album). The sound, on tracks like "Old Man" and "The Needle and the Damage Done," was Americana (steel guitar, slide guitar, banjo) stripped down and rebuilt with every jagged edge exposed.
81
The Clash, ‘The Clash’
The Clash HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1979

"I haven't got any illusions about anything," Joe Strummer said. "Having said that, I still want to try to change things." That youthful ambition bursts through the Clash's debut, a machine-gun blast of songs about unemployment ("Career Opportunities"), race ("White Riot"), the Clash themselves ("Clash City Rockers") and the sick English music industry ("[White Man] In Hammersmith Palais"). Most of the guitar was played by Mick Jones, because Strummer considered studio technique insufficiently punk. The American release was delayed two years and replaced some of the U.K. tracks with recent singles, including "Complete Control" – a complaint about exactly that sort of record-company shenanigans.
80
John Lennon, ‘Imagine’
JOhn Lennon Imagine HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Apple, 1971

After the primal-scream therapy of Plastic Ono Band, John Lennon softened up and opened up on his second solo album. There is still the stinging "Gimme Some Truth" and Lennon's evisceration of Paul McCartney, "How Do You Sleep?" – both featuring George Harrison on guitar. But there is also the aching soul of "Jealous Guy" and the irresistible vulnerability of "Oh Yoko!" Imagine is self-consciously luminescent, pointedly embraceable, the sound of cynicism melting. Lennon said of the title track, "Anti-religious, anti-nationalistic, anti­conventional, anti-capitalistic, but because it is sugarcoated it is accepted… Now I understand what you have to do. Put your political message across with a little honey."
79
Led Zeppelin, ‘Led Zeppelin II’
Led Zeppelin II HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1969

This album – recorded on the fly while the band was touring – opens with one of the most exhilarating guitar riffs in rock & roll: Jimmy Page's searing stutter in "Whole Lotta Love." As Page told Rolling Stone, "On the second LP, you can hear the real group identity coming together," by which he meant the unified might of his own white-blues devilry, John Bonham's hands-of-God drumming, Robert Plant's misty-mountain howl and John Paul Jones' firm bass and keyboard colors. Other great reasons to bang your head: "The Lemon Song," "Heart­breaker" and "Ramble On," where Plant meets a girl in the darkest depths of Mordor and single­handedly engenders a sales spike for J.R.R. Tolkien books.
78
Otis Redding, ‘Otis Blue’
Otis Redding Otis Blue HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Volt, 1965

Otis Redding's third album includes covers of three songs by Sam Cooke, Redding's idol, who had died the previous December. Their styles were different: Cooke, smooth and sure; Redding, raw and pleading. But Redding's versions of "Shake" and "A Change Is Gonna Come" show how Cooke's sound and message helped shape Redding's Southern soul, heard here in his originals "Respect" and "I've Been Loving You Too Long" and in a cover of the Rolling Stones' "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction," which was itself inspired by the Stax/Volt sound. "I use a lot of words different than the Stones' version," Redding noted. "That's because I made them up." Two years later, his life would also be tragically cut short.
77
AC/DC, ‘Back in Black’
AC/DC Back in Black HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1980

In the middle of album rehearsals, singer Bon Scott went on a drinking spree; he choked on his own vomit and was found dead in the back seat of a car. After two days of mourning, guitarist Malcolm Young thought, "Well, fuck this, I'm not gonna sit around mopin' all fuckin' year." He called his brother, guitarist Angus Young, and they went back to work with replacement vocalist Brian Johnson and savvy producer Mutt Lange. The resulting album has the relentless logic of a sledgehammer. Back in Black might be the purest distillation of hard rock ever: The title track, "Hells Bells" and the primo dance-metal banger "You Shook Me All Night Long" have all become enduring anthems of strutting blues-based guitar heat
76
Prince and the Revolution, ‘Purple Rain’
Prince and the revolution Purple Rain HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1984

The blockbuster soundtrack to Prince's semiautobiographical movie was raunchy enough to inspire the formation of the censorship watchdog group Parents' Music Resource Center. It also show­cased Prince's abilities as a guitarist, especially on "Let's Go Crazy." But at heart, Purple Rain is defined by its brilliant idiosyncrasies. Its breakthrough hit, "When Doves Cry," has no bass track (looking for a different sound, Prince removed it). According to keyboardist Dr. Fink, the title track was inspired by Bob Seger – when Prince was touring behind 1999 [see No. 163], Seger was playing many of the same markets. Prince didn't understand his appeal but decided to try a ballad in the Seger mode.
75
James Brown, ‘Star Time’

Polydor, 1991

So great is James Brown's impact that even the four-CD Star Time isn't quite comprehensive – between 1956 and 1988, Brown placed an astounding 100 singles on the R&B Top 40 charts. But every phase of his career is well represented here: the pleading, straight-up soul of "Please, Please, Please"; his instantaneous reinvention of R&B with "Papa's Got a Brand New Bag," where the rhythm takes over and melody is subsumed within the groove; his spokesmanship for the civil rights movement in "Say It Loud – I'm Black and I'm Proud (Pt. 1)"; his founding document of Seventies funk, "Get Up (I Feel Like Sex Being a) Sex Machine"; and his blueprint for hip-hop in "Funky Drummer." At 71 tracks, it never gets close to running out of soul power.
74
Neil Young, ‘After the Gold Rush’
Neil Young After the Gold Rush HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1970

For his third album, Neil Young fired Crazy Horse (the first of many times he would do so), picked up an acoustic guitar and headed to his basement. He installed recording equipment in the cellar of his Topanga Canyon home in Los Angeles, leaving room for only three or four people. There, Young made an album of heartbreaking ballads such as "Tell Me Why" and "Don't Let It Bring You Down." The music is gentle, but never smooth (check the bracing "Southern Man"). Nils Lofgren, then a 17-year-old hotshot guitarist, squeezed into the sessions, but Young assigned him to the piano, an instrument he had never played in his life; it was a characteristically contrary move that worked out beautifully.
73
Led Zeppelin, ‘Physical Graffiti’
Led Zeppelin Physical Graffiti HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Swan Song, 1975

"Let's put it this way: I had a sitar before George Harrison," said Jimmy Page, explaining his longtime love for Indian music. Zep's frontman shared that affinity: In 1972, Robert Plant and Page journeyed to Bombay to make experimental recordings with Indian studio musicians and perform in an underground disco. Physical Graffiti is the ultimate in Led Zeppelin's attempts to fuse East and West, exploring the Arabic and Indian sonorities of "Kashmir" and "In the Light." It's Zeppelin's most eclectic album, featuring down-and-dirty blues ("Black Country Woman," "Boogie With Stu"), pop balladry ("Down by the Seaside") and the 11-minute "In My Time of Dying." An excessive album from the group that all but invented excess.
72
Curtis Mayfield, ‘Superfly’
Curtis Mayfield Superfly HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Curtom, 1972

Isaac Hayes' Shaft came first – but that rec­ord had one great single and a lot of instrumental filler. It was Curtis Mayfield who made a blaxploitation-soundtrack album that packed more drama than the movie it accompanied. Musically, Superfly is astonishing, marrying lush string parts to deep bass grooves, with lots of wah-wah guitar. On top, Mayfield sings in his worldly-wise falsetto, narrating the bleak ghetto tales of "Pusherman" and "Freddie's Dead," telling hard truths about the drug trade and black life in the 1970s; it was Marvin Gaye's What's Going On at street level. "I don't take credit for everything I write," Mayfield said. "I only look upon my writings as interpretations of how the majority of people around me feel."
71
Paul Simon, ‘Graceland’
paul Simon Graceland HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1986

Frustrated by the experience of writing good songs that didn't come to life in the studio, Paul Simon set out "to make really good tracks," as he later put it. "I thought, 'I have enough songwriting technique that I can reverse this process and write the song after the tracks are made.'" Simon risked severe criticism by going to South Africa (then under apartheid) and working with the best musicians from the black townships. With the fluid energy and expertise of guitarist Ray Phiri and the vocal troupe Ladysmith Black Mambazo, Simon created an album about isolation and redemption that transcended "world music" to become the whole world's soundtrack. The bright grooves backed some of the sharpest, funniest lyrics of his career.
70
Billy Joel, ‘The Stranger’
Billy Joel The Stranger HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1977

Billy Joel had been on the verge throughout the mid-Seventies. But his fifth album had the recipe for success: a bottle of red, a bottle of white and a sharp eye for the local color of New York street life. The piano man hones his storytelling gifts with a Scorsese-style sense of humor and compassion, whether he's singing about a down-and-out Little Italy hustler in "Movin' Out (Anthony's Song)," the femme fatale in "She's Always a Woman to Me" or the doomed Long Island greaser couple Brenda and Eddie in "Scenes From an Italian Restaurant." Meanwhile, he hit the pop charts with the Grammy-winning "Just the Way You Are" (written for his first wife and manager, Elizabeth), which became a wedding-band standard.
69
Led Zeppelin, ‘Led Zeppelin IV’
Led Zeppelin IV HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1971

"I put a lot of work into my lyrics," Robert Plant told Rolling Stone in 1975. "Not all my stuff is meant to be scrutinized, though. Things like 'Black Dog' are blatant let's-do-it-in-the-bath-type things, but they make their point just the same." On their towering fourth album, Led Zeppelin match the raunch of "Black Dog" with Plant's most poetic lyrics for the inescapable epic ballad "Stairway to Heaven," while guitarist Jimmy Page veers from the blues apocalypse of "When the Levee Breaks" to the torrid Little Richard tribute "Rock & Roll" to the mandolin-driven "Battle of Evermore." ("It sounded like a dance-around-the-maypole number," Page later confessed.) Maypole or no, IV was the peak of Seventies hard rock.
68
Michael Jackson, ‘Off the Wall’
Michael Jackson Off the Wall HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1979

"The ballads were what made Off the Wall a Michael Jackson album," Jackson remembered of his big solo splash, which spun off four Top 10 hits and eclipsed the success of the Jackson 5. "I'd done ballads with [my] brothers, but they had never been too enthusiastic about them and did them more as a concession to me than anything else." In "She's Out of My Life," you can hear Jackson actually break down and cry in the studio. But the unstoppable dance tracks on Off the Wall – sculpted by Jackson and producer Quincy Jones – remain more or less perfect examples of why disco didn't suck. "Don't Stop 'Til You Get Enough," "Rock With You" and "Burn This Disco Out" still get the party started today.
67
Radiohead, ‘Kid A’
Radiohead Kid A HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 2000

"Kid A is like getting a massive eraser out and starting again," Thom Yorke said in October 2000, the week this album became the British band's first Number One record in America. "I find it difficult to think of the path we've chosen as 'rock music.'" In fact, Kid A remains the most groundbreaking rock album of the '00s – Radiohead rebuilt, with a new set of bsaics and a bleak but potent humanity. Just when the Nineties alt-rock heroes seemed destined to become the next U2, they made a fractured, twitchy anti-opus. Despite esoteric nods to electronica ("Idioteque") and free jazz ("The National Anthem"), they morphed alien sounds into a surprisingly accessible elegy to tenderness – and had a hit anyway.
66
Van Morrison, ‘Moondance’
Van Morrison Moondance HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1970

"That was the type of band I dig," Van Morrison said of the Moondance sessions. "Two horns and a rhythm section – they're the type of bands that I like best." Morrison took that soul-band lineup and ­blended it with jazz, blues, poetry and vivid memories of his Irish childhood, until songs such as "And It Stoned Me," "Crazy Love" and "Caravan" felt like lucid dreams – it's some of the most romantic music ever made. In the lushly swinging title hit, Morrison turns the words over and over in his mouth, not scatting so much as searching for a new language of desire. The title of the album's transporting centerpiece, "Into the Mystic," serves as an apt summary: This is an album of late-night revelry and ecstatic visions.
65
Phil Spector, ‘Back to Mono (1958-1969)’
Phil Spector Back to Mono HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ABKCO, 1991

When the Righteous Brothers' Bobby Hatfield first heard their "You've Lost That Lovin' Feelin'," with partner Bill Medley's extended solo, he asked, "But what do I do while he's singing the whole first verse?" Producer Phil Spector replied, "You can go directly to the bank!" Spector invented the idea of the rock producer as artist. He built his Wall of Sound out of hand claps, strings, massive overdubs and mountains of percussion, making some of the most frenzied, dramatic teenage-lust pop ever heard. This box has hits such as the Ronettes' "Be My Baby," Darlene Love's "A Fine, Fine Boy" and the Crystals' "Da Doo Ron Ron," one of Spector's "little symphonies for the kids."
64
The Rolling Stones, ‘Sticky Fingers’
Rolling Stones Sticky Fingers HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Rolling Stones Records, 1971

Drummer Charlie Watts remembered the origin of Sticky Fingers as the songs Mick Jagger wrote while filming the movie Ned Kelly in Australia. "Mick started playing the guitar a lot," Watts said. "He plays very strange rhythm guitar… very much how Bra­zilian guitarists play, on the upbeat. It is very much like the guitar on a James Brown track – for a drummer, it's great to play with." New guitarist Mick Taylor stretched out the Stones' sound in "Sway," "Can't You Hear Me Knocking" and "Moonlight Mile." But "Brown Sugar" is a classic Stones stomp, and two of the best cuts are country songs: one forlorn ("Wild Hor­ses") and one funny ("Dead Flowers").
63
U2, ‘Achtung Baby’
U2 Achtung Baby HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1991

After fostering a solemn public image for years, U2 loosened up on Achtung Baby, a prescient mix of sleek rock and pulsing Euro grooves recorded in Berlin and Dublin with Brian Eno and Daniel Lanois. They no longer sounded like young men sure of the answers; now they were full of doubt and longing. "It's a con, in a way," Bono told Rolling Stone about the album in 1992. "We call it Achtung Baby, grinning up our sleeves in all the photography. But it's probably the heaviest record we've ever made." "One" may be their most gorgeous song, but it's a dark ballad about a relationship in peril and the struggle to keep it together. Yet the emotional turmoil made U2 sound more human than ever.
62
Guns N’ Roses, ‘Appetite for Destruction’
Guns n Roses Appetite for Destruction HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Geffen, 1987

The biggest-selling debut album of all time, Appetite for Destruction, features a lot more than the yowl of Indiana-bred W. Axl Rose, the only member still in Guns N' Roses. Guitarist Slash gave the band blues emotion and punk energy, while the rhythm section brought the funk on hits such as "Welcome to the Jungle" and "Mr. Brownstone." When all the elements came together, as in the final two minutes of "Paradise City," G N' R left all other Eighties metal bands looking like poodle-haired pretenders, and they knew it, too. "A lot of rock bands are too fucking wimpy to have any sentiment or any emotion," Rose said. "Unless they're in pain."
61
Sly and the Family Stone, ‘Greatest Hits’
Sly & the Family Stone Greatest Hits HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Epic, 1970

Sly and the Family Stone created a musical utopia: an interracial group of men and women who blended funk, rock and positive vibes. Sly Stone, the Family mastermind, was one of the Sixties' most ambitious artists, mixing up the hardest funk beats with hippie psychedelia in hits such as "Thank You (Falettinme Be Mice Elf Agin)." Greatest Hits ranges from gospel-style ballads ("Everybody Is a Star") to rump shakers ("Everyday People") to soulful bubblegum ("Hot Fun in the Summertime"). Stone discovered his utopia had a ghetto, and he brilliantly tore the whole thing down on 1971's There's a Riot Goin' On [see No. 99]. But nothing can negate the joy of this music.
60
Captain Beefheart and His Magic Band, ‘Trout Mask Replica’
Captain Beefheart Trout Mask Replica HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Straight, 1969

On first listen, Trout Mask Replica sounds like a wild, incomprehensible rampage through the blues. Don Van Vliet (a.k.a. Captain Beefheart) growls, rants and recites poetry over chaotic guitar licks. But every note was precisely planned in advance – to construct the songs, the Magic Band rehearsed 12 hours a day for months on end in a house with the windows blacked out. (Producer and longtime friend Frank Zappa was then able to record most of the album in less than five hours.) The avant-garde howl of tracks such as "Ella Guru" and "My Human Gets Me Blues" have inspired modern primitives from Tom Waits to PJ Harvey.
59
Creedence Clearwater Revival, ‘Chronicle Vol. 1’

Fantasy, 1976

Between 1968 and early 1972, CCR rolled out 13 Top 40 songs, which still stand as the most impressive run of hits made by an American band. Former Army reservist and Little Richard fan John Fogerty was the dance-band populist on the San Francisco ballroom scene, writing concise, catchy songs like "Down on the Corner" and "Proud Mary" that fused R&B boogie with longhaired West Coast chooglin'. He also tapped into the spirit of the times, tackling the Vietnam War on "Who'll Stop the Rain" and class politics on "Fortunate Son." This compilation demonstrates over and over how much American possibility you can pack into two-minute blasts of car-radio heaven.
58
The Rolling Stones, ‘Beggars Banquet’
Rolling Stones Beggars Banquet HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

ABKCO, 1968

"When we had been in the States between 1964 and '66, I had gathered together this enormous collection of records, but I never had any time to listen to them," Keith Richards recalled. "In late 1966 and '67, I unwrapped them and actually played them." After the wayward psychedelia of 1967's Their Satanic Majesties Request, and with guitarist Brian Jones largely AWOL, Richards' record collection led the Rolling Stones back to their version of America: country music on "Dear Doctor," the blues on "Prodigal Son" and urban riots on "Street Fighting Man." And "Sympathy for the Devil" is an anthem for the darkness in every human heart – in other words, just one more example of the Stones getting back to basics.
57
Stevie Wonder, ‘Songs in the Key of Life’
Stevie Wonder Songs in the Key of Life HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Motown/Universal, 1976

Making this record, Stevie Wonder would often stay in the studio 48 hours straight, not eating or sleeping, while everyone around him struggled to keep up. "If my flow is goin', I keep on until I peak," he said. The flow went so well, Wonder released 21 songs, packaged as a double album and a bonus EP. The highlights are the joyful "Isn't She Lovely" and "Sir Duke," but Wonder also displays his mastery of funk, jazz, Afrobeat and even a string-quartet minuet. Nineteen years later, Coolio turned the haunting groove of "Pastime Paradise" into the Number One single "Gang­sta's Paradise," just one example of Life's vast influence on decades of pop.
56
Elvis Presley, ‘Elvis Presley’
Elvis Presley HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1956

In November 1955, RCA Records bought Presley's contract, singles and unreleased master tapes from Sun Records. His first full-length album came out six months later, with tracks drawn from both the Sun sessions and further recordings at RCA's studios in New York and Nashville. It became the first rock & roll album to make it to Number One on the Billboard charts. "There wasn't any pressure," guitarist Scotty Moore said of the first RCA sessions. "They were just bigger studios with different equipment. We basically just went in and did the same thing we always did." On tracks such as "Blue Suede Shoes," that meant revved-up country music with the sexiest voice anyone had ever heard.
55
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, ‘Electric Ladyland’
Jimi Hendrix ElectricLandland HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Reprise, 1968

Hendrix's third album was the first he produced himself, a fever dream of underwater electric soul cut in round-the-clock sessions at the Record Plant in New York. Hendrix would leave the Record Plant to jam at a club around the corner, the Scene, and "Voodoo Chile" – 15 minutes of live in-the-studio blues exploration with Steve Winwood on organ and Jefferson Airplane's Jack Casady on bass – reflects those excursions. In addition to psychedelic Delta blues, there was the precision snap of "Crosstown Traffic" and a cover of "All Along the Watchtower" that took Bob Dylan into outer space before touching down with a final burst of spectral fury.
54
Ray Charles, ‘The Birth of Soul: The Complete Atlantic Recordings’
Ray Charles The Birth of Soul HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Atlantic, 1991

Soul music is a blend of the holy and the filthy: gospel and blues rubbing up against each other. And Ray Charles was just about the first person to perfect that mix. Charles was knocking around Seattle when Atlantic bought out his contract in 1952. For the next seven years, he turned out brilliant singles such as "What'd I Say" and "I Got a Woman," which was a takeoff on a gospel tune, "It Must Be Jesus." He was inventing the sound of ecstasy, three minutes at a time. This box collects every R&B side he cut for Atlantic, though his swinging take on "My Bonnie" will have you thinking it covers his Atlantic jazz output as well.
53
The Beatles, ‘Meet the Beatles!’
The Beatles Meet the Beatles HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1964

For Americans in the full grip of Beatlemania, this was the first album they could buy. Meet took the Fab Four's second British record, With the Beatles, dropped five covers and added three tracks, including the singles "I Want to Hold Your Hand" and "I Saw Her Standing There." (This may have made a hash of the Beatles' artistic intentions, but it made for a much better record.) John Lennon and Paul McCartney were on a songwriting roll that would be unmatched in rock history, and at this point they were still a real team. They wrote "I Want to Hold Your Hand" together on a piano in the basement of Jane Asher, McCartney's actress girlfriend – as Lennon put it, "eyeball to eyeball."
52
Al Green, ‘Greatest Hits’
Al Green Greatest Hits HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Hi, 1975

Al Green made some of the most visionary soul music of the Seventies, in Memphis with producer Willie Mitchell. "In Memphis, you just do as you feel," he told Rolling Stone in 1972. "It's not a modern, up-to-par, very glamorous, big-red-chairs-and-carpet-that-thick studio. It's one of those places you can go into and stomp out a good soul jam." In collaboration with Mitchell and subtly responsive musicians like drummer Al Jackson Jr., Green was a natural album artist, making love-and-pain classics such as 1973's Call Me. But this collection makes for a unified album in itself, compiling hits like "Let's Stay Together," "I'm Still in Love With You" and "Tired of Being Alone" into a flawless 10-song suite.
51
Simon and Garfunkel, ‘Bridge Over Troubled Water’
SImon & Garfunkel Bridge over Troubled Water HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1970

On their fifth and final studio album, Paul Simon and Art Garfunkel were pulling away from each other: Simon assembled some of it while Garfunkel was in Mexico starting his acting career with a part in the film version of Catch-22. Garfunkel vetoed Simon's "Cuba Sí, Nixon No," and Simon nixed Garfunkel's idea for a Bach chorale. But what remains is the partnership at its best: wry, wounded songs with healing harmonies such as "The Boxer," though the gorgeous title track was sung by Garfunkel alone, despite his resistance. "He felt I should have done it," Simon told Rolling Stone in 1972. "And many times I'm sorry I didn't do it."

50
Little Richard, ‘Here’s Little Richard’

Specialty, 1957

"I came from a family where my people didn't like rhythm & blues," Little Richard told Rolling Stone in 1970. "Bing Crosby, 'Pennies From Heaven,' Ella Fitzgerald was all I heard. And I knew there was something that could be louder than that, but didn't know where to find it. And I found it was me." Richard's raucous 1957 debut album collected singles such as "Rip It Up" and "Long Tall Sally," in which his rollicking boogie-­woogie piano and falsetto scream ignited the unfettered possibilities of rock & roll. "Tutti Frutti" still contains what has to be considered the most inspired rock lyric ever recorded: "A wop bop alu bop, a wop bam boom!"
49
The Allman Brothers Band, ‘At Fillmore East’
The Allman Brothers band At Fillmore East HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Mercury, 1971

Rock's greatest live double LP is an unbeatable testimony to the Allman Brothers' improvisational skills, as well as evidence of how they connected with audiences to make jamming feel communal. "The audience would kind of play along with us," singer­organist Gregg Allman said of the March 1971 shows documented here. "They were right on top of every single vibration coming from the stage." The dazzling guitar team of Duane Allman and Dickey Betts was at its peak, seamlessly fusing blues and jazz in "Whipping Post" and "In Memory of Elizabeth Reed." But their telepathy was interrupted: Just three months after the album's release, Duane died in a motorcycle accident.
48
Public Enemy, ‘It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back’
Public Enemy IT Takes a nation of millions to hold us back HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Def Jam, 1988

Loud, obnoxious, funky, avant-garde, political, hilarious – Public Enemy's brilliant second album is all of these things, all at once. Chuck D booms intricate rhymes with a delivery inspired by sportscaster Marv Albert; sidekick Flavor Flav raps comic relief; and production team the Bomb Squad builds mesmerizing, multilayered jams, pierced with shrieking sirens. The title and roiling force of "Bring the Noise" is truth in advertising. "If they're callin' my music 'noise,'" said Chuck D, "if they're saying that I'm really getting out of character being a black person in America, then fine – I'm bringin' more noise."
47
John Coltrane, ‘A Love Supreme’
JOhn Coltrane A Love Supreme HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Impulse, 1964

Two important things happened to John Coltrane in 1957: The saxophonist left Miles Davis' employ to join Thelonious Monk's band and hit new heights in extended, ecstatic soloing. Coltrane also kicked heroin addiction, a vital step in a spiritual awakening that climaxed with this legendary album-long hymn of praise – transcendent music perfect for the high point of the civil rights movement. The indelible four-note theme of the first piece, "Acknowledgment," is the humble foundation of the suite. But Coltrane's majestic, often violent blowing (famously described as "sheets of sound") is never self-aggrandizing. His playing soars with nothing but gratitude and joy. You can't help but go with him.
46
Bob Marley and the Wailers, ‘Legend’
Bob Marley & the Wailers Legend HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Island, 1984

Bob Marley said, "Reggae music is too simple for [American musicians]. You must be inside of it, know what's happening, and why you want to play this music. You don't just run and go play this music because you think you can make a million off it." Ironically, this set of the late reggae idol's greatest hits has sold in the millions worldwide. In a single disc, it captures everything that made him an international icon: his nuanced songcraft, his political message (and savvy), and – of course – the universal soul he brought to Jamaican rhythm and Rastafarian spirituality in the gunfighter ballad "I Shot the Sheriff," the comforting swing of "No Woman, No Cry" and the holy promise of "Redemption Song."
45
The Band, ‘The Band’
The Band THe Band HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1969

The Band were four-fifths Canadian – drummer Levon Helm was from Arkansas – but their second album is all American. Guitarist Robbie Robertson's songs vividly evoke the country's pioneer age ("Across the Great Divide") and the Civil War ("The Night They Drove Old Dixie Down"), while reflecting the fractured state of the nation in the 1960s. The Band's long life on the road resonates in the brawn of Garth Hudson's keyboards and Helm's juke-joint attack. But Robertson's stories truly live in Helm's growl, Rick Danko's high tenor and Richard Manuel's spectral croon. "Somebody once said he had a tear in his voice," Helm said of Manuel. "Richard had one of the richest-textured voices I'd ever heard."
44
Patti Smith, ‘Horses’
Patti Smith Horses HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Arista, 1975

From its first defiant line, "Jesus died for somebody's sins, but not mine," the opening shot in a bold reinvention of Van Morrison's Sixties garage-rock classic "Gloria," Patti Smith's debut album was a declaration of committed mutiny, a statement of faith in the transfigurative powers of rock & roll. Horses made her the queen of punk before it even really existed, but Smith cared more for the poetry in rock. She sought the visions and passions that connected Keith Richards and Rimbaud – and found them, with the intuitive assistance of a killing band (pianist Richard Sohl, guitarist Lenny Kaye, bassist Ivan Kral and drummer Jay Dee Daugherty) and her friend Robert Mapplethorpe, who shot the stark, beautiful cover portrait.
43
Pink Floyd, ‘The Dark Side of the Moon’
Pink Floyd Dark Side of the Moon HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

EMI, 1973

"I think every album was a step toward Dark Side of the Moon," keyboardist Rick Wright said. "We were learning all the time; the techniques of the recording and our writing was getting better." As a culmination of their inner-space explorations of the early 1970s, the Floyd toured the bulk of Dark Side in Britain for months prior to recording. But in the studio, the band articulated bassist Roger Waters' reveries on the madness of everyday life with melodic precision ("Breathe," "Us and Them") and cinematic luster (Clare Torry's guest-vocal aria, "The Great Gig in the Sky"). It's one of the best-produced rock albums ever, and "Money" may be the only Top 20 hit in 7/4 time.
42
The Doors, ‘The Doors’
The Doors The Doors HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1967

After blowing minds as the house band at L.A.'s Whisky-a-Go-Go, where they got fired for playing the Oedipal drama "The End," the Doors were ready to unleash their organ-driven rock on the world. "On each song we had tried every possible arrangement," drummer John Densmore said, "so we felt the whole album was tight." The Blakean pop art on their debut was beyond Top 40 attention spans. But they hit pay dirt by editing down one of their jams: "Light My Fire," written by guitarist Robbie Krieger when Jim Morrison told everybody in the band to write a song with universal imagery.
41
The Sex Pistols, ‘Never Mind the Bollocks, Here’s the Sex Pistols’
The Sex Pistols Nevermind The Bollocks HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Warner Bros., 1977

"If the sessions had gone the way I wanted, it would have been unlistenable for most people," Johnny Rotten said. "If you want people to listen, you’re going to have to compromise." But few heard it that way at the time. The Pistols' only studio album sounds like a rejection of everything rock & roll had to offer. True, the music was less shocking than Rotten himself, who snarled about abortions, anarchy and hatred. But Never Mind. . . is the Sermon on the Mount of U.K. punk – and its echoes are everywhere.
40
Love, ‘Forever Changes’
Love Forever Changes HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Elektra, 1967

"When I did that album," singer Arthur Lee said, "I thought I was going to die at that particular time, so those were my last words." Lee, who died of cancer in 2006, was still performing this album live well into the '00s. And for good reason: The third record by his biracial L.A. band is wild and funny and totally pioneering: folk rock turned into elegant Armageddon with the symphonic sweep and mariachi-brass drama of "Alone Again Or" and "You Set the Scene." In the late Nineties, Lee served time in prison. After his release, he brought extra pathos to "Live and Let Live" when he sang, "Served my time, served it well."
39
The Beatles, ‘Please Please Me’
The Beatles Please PLease Me HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Parlophone, 1963

The Beatles recorded 10 of the 14 songs on their debut album at EMI's Abbey Road studio in just over 12 hours on February 11th, 1963. For productivity alone, it's one of the greatest first albums in rock. The Beatles had already invented a bracing new sound for a rock band – an assault of thrumming energy and impeccable vocal harmonies – and they nailed it using the covers and originals in their live repertoire: the Shirelles' "Boys" and Arthur Alexander's "Anna"; the Lennon–McCartney burners "There's a Place" and "I Saw Her Standing There." Fittingly, John Lennon finished the epochal all-day session shirtless and shredding what was left of his vocal cords on two takes of "Twist and Shout."
38
Muddy Waters, ‘The Anthology’
Muddy Waters The Anthology HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Chess/MCA, 2001

McKinley Morganfield – a.k.a. Muddy Waters – started out playing acoustic Delta blues in Mississippi. But when he moved to Chicago in 1943, he needed an electric guitar to be heard over the tumult of South Side clubs. The sound he developed was the foundation of Chicago blues – and rock & roll; the thick, bleeding tones of his slide work anticipated rock-guitar distortion by nearly two decades. Jimi Hendrix adapted Waters' "Rollin' Stone" for "Voodoo Chile," Bob Dylan found inspiration in it for "Like a Rolling Stone," and Mick Jagger and Keith Richards took their band's name from it. The 50 cuts on these two CDs run from guitar-and-stand-up-bass duets to full-band romps – and they only scratch the surface of Waters' legacy.
37
The Eagles, ‘Hotel California’
The Eagles Hotel California HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Asylum, 1976

In pursuit of note-perfect Hollywood-cowboy ennui, the Eagles spent eight months in the studio polishing take after take after take. As Don Henley recalled, "We just locked ourselves in. We had a refrigerator, a ping-pong table, roller skates and a couple of cots. We would go in and stay for two or three days at a time." With guitarist Joe Walsh replacing Bernie Leadon, the band backed off from straight country rock in favor of the harder sound of "Life in the Fast Lane." The somber "New Kid in Town" ponders the fleeting nature of fame, and the title track is a monument to the rock-aristocrat decadence of the day and a feast of triple-guitar interplay. "Every band has their peak," Henley said. "That was ours."
36
Carole King, ‘Tapestry’
Carole King Tapestry HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Ode, 1971

For nearly a decade, Carole King wrote Brill Building pop with her then-husband, Gerry Goffin: hits such as Little Eva's "The Loco-Motion" (Eva Boyd was the couple's baby sitter) and the Monkees' "Pleasant Valley Sunday." Then King's friend James Taylor encouraged her to sing her own tunes. She slowed down "Will You Love Me Tomorrow" (originally a hit for the Shirelles in 1960), heightening the melancholy inside, while her warm, earnest singing brought out the sadness in "So Far Away" and "It's Too Late" and the earthy joy on "I Feel the Earth Move." On Tapestry, King remade herself as an artist and created the reigning model for the 1970s female singer-songwriter – not to mention a blockbuster pop record of enduring artistic quality.
35
David Bowie, ‘The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders From Mars’
David Bowie The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders From Mars HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

RCA, 1972

This album documents one of the most elaborate self-mythologizing schemes in rock, as David Bowie created the glittery, messianic alter ego Ziggy Stardust ("well-hung and snow-white tan"). The glam rock Bowie made with guitarist Mick Ronson on tracks like "Hang on to Yourself" and "Suffragette City" is an irresistible blend of sexy, campy pop and blues power. The anthem "Ziggy Stardust" is one of rock's earliest, and best, power ballads. "I consider myself responsible for a whole new school of pretensions," Bowie said at the time. "They know who they are. Don't you, Elton? Just kidding. No, I'm not."
34
The Band, ‘Music From Big Pink’
The Band Music From Big Pink HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Capitol, 1968

"Big Pink" was a pink house in Woodstock, New York, where the Band – Bob Dylan's '65-'66 backup band on tour – moved to be near Dylan after his motorcycle accident. While he recuperated, the Band backed him on the demos later known as The Basement Tapes [see No. 292] and made their own debut. Dylan offered to play on the album; the Band said no thanks. "We didn't want to just ride his shirttail," drummer Levon Helm said. Dylan contributed "I Shall Be Released" and co-wrote two other tunes. But it was the rustic beauty of the Band's music and the drama of their own reflections on family and obligations, on songs such as "The Weight," that made Big Pink an instant homespun classic.
33
Ramones, ‘Ramones’
The Ramones HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Sire, 1976

"Our early songs came out of our real feelings of alienation, isolation, frustration – the feelings every­body feels between 17 and 75," said singer Joey Ramone. Clocking in at just over 28 minutes, Ramones is a complete rejection of the spangled artifice of 1970s rock. The songs are fast and anti-social, just like the band: "Beat on the Brat," "Blitzkrieg Bop," "Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue." Guitarist Johnny Ramone refused to play solos – his jackhammer chords became the lingua franca of punk – and the whole thing was recorded for just over $6,000. Yet amid the buoyantly nihilist fury, Joey Ramone's leather-tender plea "I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend" showed that even punks need love.
32
The Rolling Stones, ‘Let It Bleed’
Rolling Stones Let It Bleed HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

London, 1969

The Rolling Stones' final record of the Sixties kicks off with the terrifying "Gimme Shelter," the song that came to symbolize not only the catastrophe of the Stones' free show at Altamont but the death of the decade's utopian spirit. And the entire album burns with apocalyptic cohesion: the sex-mad desperation of "Live With Me"; the murderous blues of "Midnight Rambler"; Keith Richards' lethal, biting guitar on "Monkey Man"; the epic moralism, with honky-tonk piano and massed vocal chorus, of "You Can't Always Get What You Want," which Mick Jagger wrote on acoustic guitar in his bedroom. "Somebody said that we could get the London Bach Choir," Jagger recalled years later, "and we said, 'That will be a laugh.'"
31
Bob Dylan, ‘Bringing It All Back Home’
Bob Dylan Bringing It All Back Home HIGH RESOLUTION COVER ART

Columbia, 1965

"It's very complicated to play with electricity," Bob Dylan said in the summer of 1965. "You're dealing with other people… Most people who don't like rock & roll can't relate to other people." But on Side One of this pioneering album, Dylan amplifies his cryptic, confrontational songwriting with guitar lightning and galloping drums. "Subterranean Homesick Blues" and "Maggie's Farm" are loud, caustic and funny as hell. Dylan returns to solo acoustic guitar on the four superb songs on Side Two, including the scabrous "It's Alright, Ma (I'm Only Bleeding)" and the closing ballad, "It's All Over Now, Baby Blue," arguably his finest, most affectionate song of dismissal.
30
Joni Mitchell, ‘Blue’
Joni Mitchell "Blue" high res cover art

Reprise, 1971

“The Blue album, there’s hardly a dishonest note in the vocals,” Joni Mitchell told Rolling Stone in 1979. “At that period of my life, I had no persona defenses. I felt like a cellophane wrapper on a pack of cigarettes. I felt like I had absolutely no secrets from the world, and I couldn’t pretend in my life to be strong. Or to be happy.” With song after song of regrets and sorrow, this may be the ultimate breakup album. Its whispery minimalism is also Mitchell’s greatest musical achievement. Stephen Stills and James Taylor lend an occasional hand, but in “California,” “Carey,” “This Flight Tonight” and the devastating title track, Mitchell sounds utterly alone in her melancholy, turning the sadness into tender, universally powerful art. Listen here.
29
Led Zeppelin, ‘Led Zeppelin’
Led Zeppelin I high res cover art

Atlantic, 1969

On their first album, Led Zeppelin were still in the process of inventing their own sound, moving on from the heavy rave-ups of guitarist Jimmy Page's previous band, the Yardbirds. But from the beginning, Zeppelin had the astonishing fusion of Page's lyrical guitar-playing, Robert Plant's paint-peeling love-hound yowl, and John Paul Jones and John Bonham's avalanche boogie. "We were learning what got us off most and what got people off most," said Plant. Yet the template for everything Zeppelin achieved in the 1970s is here: brutal rock ("Communication Breakdown"), thundering power balladry ("Your Time Is Gonna Come"), acid-flavored folk blues ("Babe I'm Gonna Leave You"). Heavy metal still lives in its shadow.
28
The Who, ‘Who’s Next’
The Who "Who's Next" high res cover art

Decca, 1971

Pete Townshend said he suffered a nervous breakdown when his planned follow-up to the rock opera Tommy, the ambitious, theatrical Lifehouse, fell apart. But he was left with an extraordinary cache of songs that the Who honed for what became their best studio album, Who's Next. "Won't Get Fooled Again," "Bargain" and "Baba O'Riley" (named in tribute to avant-garde composer Terry Riley and Townshend's spiritual guru Meher Baba) all beam with epic majesty, often spiked with synthesizers. "I like synthesizers," Townshend said, "because they bring into my hands things that aren't in my hands: the sound of the orchestra, French horns, strings… You press a switch and it plays it back at double speed."
27
U2, ‘The Joshua Tree’
U2 "THe Joshua Tree" high res cover art

Island, 1987

"America's the promised land to a lot of Irish people," Bono told Rolling Stone. "I'm one in a long line of Irishmen who made the trip." On U2's fifth studio album, the band immersed itself in the mythology of the United States, while the Edge exploited the poetic echo of digital delay, drowning his trademark arpeggios in rippling tremolo. One of the most moving songs is "Running to Stand Still," a stripped-down slide-guitar ballad about heroin addiction, but for the most part this is an album that turns spiritual quests and political struggles into uplifting stadium singalongs: See hits like "Where the Streets Have No Name" and "I Still Haven't Found What I'm Looking For," a rock anthem with a gospel soul.
26
Fleetwood Mac, ‘Rumours’
Fleetwood Mac "Rumours" high res cover art

Warner Bros., 1977

On Rumours, Fleetwood Mac turned private turmoil into gleaming, melodic public art. The band's two couples – bassist John and singer-keyboard player Christine McVie, who were married; guitarist Lindsey Buckingham and vocalist Stevie Nicks, who were not – were in the midst of breakups during the album's protracted sessions. This lent a highly charged, confessional aura to songs like Buckingham's "Go Your Own Way," Nicks' "Dreams," Christine's "Don't Stop" and the group-composed anthem to betrayal, "The Chain." The Mac's catchy exposés, produced with California-sunshine polish, touched a nerve: Rumours became the gold standard of late-Seventies FM radio and the seventh-bestselling studio album of all time.
25
James Brown, ‘Live at the Apollo’
james Brown "Live at the Apollo" high res cover art

King, 1963

Perhaps the greatest live album ever recorded. From the breathless buildup of the spoken intro through terse, sweat-soaked early hits such as "Try Me" and "Think" into 11 minutes of the raw ballad "Lost Someone," climaxing with a frenzied nine-song medley and ending with "Night Train," Live at the Apollo is pure, uncut soul. And it almost didn't happen. James Brown defied King Records label boss Syd Nathan's opposition to a live album by arranging to record a show himself – on October 24th, 1962, the last date in a run at Harlem's historic Apollo Theater. His intuition proved correct: Live at the Apollo – the first of four albums Brown recorded there – charted for 66 weeks.
24
Stevie Wonder, ‘Innervisons’
Stevie Wonder "Innervisions" high res cover art

Tamala, 1973

Stevie Wonder's high-flying musical experimentation and penetrating lyrical insight made Innervisions a textured, but never self-indulgent, work of soulful self-discovery. Fusing social realism with spiritual idealism, he brings expressive color and irresistible funk to his keyboards on "Too High" (a cautionary anti-drug song) and "Higher Ground" (which echoes Martin Luther King Jr.'s message of transcendence). The album's centerpiece is "Living for the City," a cinematic depiction of exploitation and injustice. He brought his most innovative music to life in the nick of time: Three days after Innervisions was released, Wonder was put into a four-day coma after the car he was traveling in collided with a logging truck.
23
John Lennon, ‘Plastic Ono Band’
John Lennon "the Plastic Ono Band" high res cover art

Capitol, 1970

Also known as the "primal scream" album, referring to the painful therapy that gave rise to its songs, Plastic Ono Band was John Lennon's first proper solo album and rock & roll's most self-revelatory recording. Lennon attacks and ­denies idols and icons, including his own former band ("I don't believe in Beatles," he sings in "God"), to hit a pure, raw core of confession that, in its echo-drenched, garage-rock crudity, is years ahead of punk. He deals with childhood loss in "Mother" and skirts blasphemy in "Working Class Hero": "You're still fucking peasants as far as I can see." But consigning Sixties dreams to the rubbish bin, there's also room for a fragile sense of possibility (see "Hold On"). Plastic Ono Band is the sound of Year Zero.
22
Robert Johnson, ‘The Complete Recordings’

Columbia, 1990

"You want to know how good the blues can get?" Keith Richards asked. "Well, this is it." The bluesman in question was Robert Johnson, who lived from 1911 to 1938 in the Mississippi Delta, and whose guitar prowess was so great, it inspired stories that he had sold his soul to the devil in exchange for his amazing gift. In his only two recording sessions, Johnson cut just 29 songs, but their evanescent passion has resonated through the decades, crucial inspiration for everyone from Chicago blues originator Elmore James to British blues inheritors like the Stones and Eric Clapton. Every one of his songs (along with 12 alternate takes) is included here – a holy grail of the blues.
21
Chuck Berry, ‘The Great Twenty-Eight’
The Great Twenty-Eight Chuck Berry high res cover art

Chess, 1982

In the latter half of the Fifties, Chuck Berry released a string of singles that defined the sound and spirit of rock & roll. "Maybellene," a fast, countryish rocker about a race between a Ford and a Cadillac, kicked it all off in 1955, and one classic hit followed another, each powered by Berry's staccato country-blues-guitar gunfire: "Roll Over Bee­thoven," "School Days," "Rock and Roll Music," "Sweet Little Sixteen," "Johnny B. Goode," "Back in the USA." What was Berry's secret? In the maestro's own words, "The nature and backbone of my beat is boogie, and the muscle of my music is melodies that are simple." This collection culls the best of that magic from 1955 to 1965.
20
Michael Jackson, ‘Thriller’
Michael Jackson "Thriller" high res cover art

Epic, 1982

Michael Jackson towered over the 1980s the way Elvis Presley dominated the 1950s, and here's why. On Thriller, the child R&B star ripened into a Technicolor soulman: a singer, dancer and songwriter with incomparable crossover instincts. He and producer Quincy Jones established the something-for-everyone template with 1979's Off the Wall, a crisp fusion of pop hooks and dance beats. On Thriller, the pair heighten the sheen ("The Girl Is Mine"), pump up the theater ("Thriller") and deepen the funk. But the most thrilling thing was the autobiography busting through the gloss: the hiss of denial on "Billie Jean"; the to-hell-with-haters strut of "Wanna Be Startin' Somethin'." Jackson was at the peak of his art and adulthood.
19
Van Morrison, ‘Astral Weeks’
converted PNM file high res cover art Van Morrison Astral Weeks

Warner Bros., 1968

Van Morrison never sounded more warm and ecstatic, more sensual and vulnerable, than on his enigmatically beautiful solo debut. Fresh off the success of "Brown Eyed Girl" and newly signed to artist­friendly Warner Bros., he explored the physical and dramatic range of his voice during extended poetic-scat singing, and set hallucinatory reveries on his native Belfast to wandering Celtic-R&B melodies. The crowning touch was the superior jazz quintet convened by producer Lewis Merenstein to color the mists and shadows. Bassist Richard Davis later said that Morrison never told the musicians what he wanted from them or what the lyrics meant. Maybe he didn't know how to. He was going deep inside himself, without a net or fear.
18
Bruce Springsteen, ‘Born to Run’
Bruce Springsteen Born to Run high res cover art

Columbia, 1975

Bruce Springsteen spent everything he had – patience, energy, studio time, the physical endurance of his E Street Band – to make his masterpiece. There are a dozen guitar overdubs on the title track alone. "The album became a monster," Springsteen recalled. But in making his third album, he was living out the central drama in its gun-the-engine rock & roll: the fight to reconcile big dreams with crushing reality. He found it so hard to re-create the sound in his head – the Jersey-bar dynamite of his live gigs, Phil Spector's grandeur, Roy Orbison's melodrama – that he nearly gave up and put out a live album. But his attention to detail produced a timeless record about the labors and glories of aspiring to greatness.
17
Nirvana, ‘Nevermind’
Nirvana "Nevermind" high res cover art

Geffen, 1991

The overnight-success story of the 1990s, Nirvana's second album and its totemic first single, "Smells Like Teen Spirit," shot up from the nascent grunge scene in Seattle to kick Michael Jackson off the top of the Billboard album chart and blow hair metal off the map. No album in recent history had such an overpowering impact on a generation – a nation of teens suddenly turned punk – and such a catastrophic effect on its main creator. The weight of fame led already troubled singer-guitarist Kurt Cobain to take his own life in 1994. But his slashing riffs, corrosive singing and deviously oblique writing, rammed home by the Pixies-via-Zeppelin might of bassist Krist Novoselic and drummer Dave Grohl, put the warrior purity back in rock & roll. Lyrically, Cobain raged in code – shorthand grenades of inner tumult and self-loathing. His genius, though, in songs like "Lithium," "Breed" and "Teen Spirit" was the soft-loud tension he created between verse and chorus, restraint and assault. Cobain was a pop lover at heart – and a Beatlemaniac: Nevermind producer Butch Vig remembers hearing Cobain play John Lennon's "Julia" at sessions. Cobain also fought to maintain his underground honor. Ultimately, it was a losing battle, but it is part of this album's enduring power. Vig recalls when Cobain was forced to overdub the guitar intro to "Teen Spirit" because he couldn't nail it live with the band: "That pissed him off. He wanted to play [the song] live all the way through."
16
Bob Dylan, ‘Blood on the Tracks’
Bob Dylan "Blood on the Tracks" high res cover art

Columbia, 1975

Bob Dylan once introduced this album's opening song, "Tangled Up in Blue," onstage as taking him 10 years to live and two years to write. It was, for him, a pointed reference to the personal crisis – the collapse of his marriage to Sara Lowndes – that at least partly inspired this album, Dyl­an's best of the 1970s. In fact, he wrote all of these lyrically piercing, gingerly majestic songs in two months, in mid-1974. He was so proud of them that he privately auditioned almost all of the album, from start to finish, for pals and peers including Mike Bloomfield, David Crosby and Graham Nash before cutting them in September – in just a week, with members of the bluegrass band Deliverance. But in December, Dylan played the record for his brother David in Minneapolis, who suggested recutting some songs with local musicians. The final Blood was a mix of the slow, pensive New York sessions and the faster, wilder Minneapolis dates. Together, they frame the gritty anguish in some of Dylan's most passionate, confessional songs – from adult breakup ballads like "If You See Her, Say Hello" to the sharp-tongued opprobrium of "Idiot Wind," his greatest put-down song since "Like a Rolling Stone." "It's hard for me to relate to people enjoying that type of pain," Dylan said after the album became an instant success. Yet he had never turned so much pain into so much musical splendor.
15
The Jimi Hendrix Experience, ‘Are You Experienced?’
THe Jimi Hendrix Experience "Are You Experienced" high res cover art

Reprise, 1967

This is what Britain sounded like in late 1966 and early 1967: ablaze with rainbow blues, orchestral guitar feedback and the personal cosmic vision of black American émigré Jimi Hendrix. Rescued from dead-end gigs in New York by ex-Animal Chas Chandler, Hendrix arrived in London in September 1966, quickly formed the Experience with bassist Noel Redding and drummer Mitch Mitchell and in a matter of weeks was recording the songs that comprised his epochal debut – which stands four and a half decades later as rock's most innovative and expressive guitar record. Hendrix's incendiary playing was historic in itself, the luminescent sum of his chitlin-circuit labors in the early Sixties with Little Richard and the Isley Brothers and his melodic exploitation of amp howl. But it was the pictorial heat of songs like "Manic Depression," "I Don't Live Today" and "The Wind Cries Mary" that established the transcendent promise of psychedelia. Hendrix made soul music for inner space. "It's a collection of free feeling and imagination," he said of the album. "Imagination is very important." Widely assumed to be about an acid trip, "Purple Haze" had "nothing to do with drugs," Hendrix insisted. "'Purple Haze' was all about a dream I had that I was walking under the sea."
14
The Beatles, ‘Abbey Road’
The Beatles "Abby Road" high res cover art

Capitol, 1969

"It was a very happy record," said producer George Martin. "I guess it was happy because everybody thought it was going to be the last." Abbey Road – recorded mostly in two months during the summer of 1969 – almost never got made at all. That January, the Beatles were on the verge of a breakup, exhausted and angry with one another after the disastrous sessions for the aborted Get Back LP, later salvaged as Let It Be [see No. 392]. Determined to go out with a sense of recaptured glory, the group reconvened at EMI's Abbey Road Studios to make its most polished album: a collection of superb songs cut with an attention to refined detail, then segued together (especially on Side Two) with conceptual force. There was no thematic link, other than the Beatles' unique genius. John Lennon veered from the stormy metal of "I Want You (She's So Heavy)" to the exquisite vocal sunrise of "Because." Paul McCartney was saucy ("Oh! Darling"), silly ("Maxwell's Silver Hammer") and deliciously bitter ("You Never Give Me Your Money"). George Harrison proved his long-secret worth as a composer with "Something" and the folk-pop diamond "Here Comes the Sun," written in his friend Eric Clapton's garden while playing hooky from a business meeting. And Lennon, McCartney and Harrison reputedly sang more three-part harmony here than on any other Beatles album. Let It Be was the group's final release, but this album was its real goodbye.
13
The Velvet Underground and Nico, ‘The Velvet Underground’
Velvet Underground and Nico "Andy Warhol Peel Slowly and See" high res cover art mini

Verve, 1967

"We were trying to do a Phil Spector thing with as few instruments as possible," John Cale, the classically trained pianist and viola player of the Velvet Underground, said of this record. It was no idle boast. Much of what we take for granted in rock would not exist without this New York band or its seminal debut: the androgynous sexuality of glitter; punk's raw noir; the blackened-riff howl of grunge and noise rock; goth's imperious gloom. Recorded dirt-cheap at a studio that was literally falling apart, it is a record of fearless breadth and lyric depth. Singer-songwriter Lou Reed documented carnal desire and drug addiction, decadence and redemption, with a pop wisdom he learned as a song-factory composer for Pickwick Records. Cale introduced the power of pulse and drone (from his work with minimalist composer La Monte Young); guitarist Sterling Morrison and drummer Maureen Tucker played with tribal force; Nico, a German vocalist added to the band by manager Andy Warhol, brought an icy femininity to the heated ennui in Reed's songs. Rejected as nihilistic by the love crowd in '67, the Banana Album (so named for its Warhol-designed cover) is the most pro­phetic rock album ever made.
12
Miles Davis, ‘Kind of Blue’
Miles Davis "Kind of Blue" high res cover art

Columbia, 1959

This painterly masterpiece would become one of the most important, influential and popular albums in jazz. But at the time it was made, Kind of Blue was a revolution all its own, a radical break from everything going on. Turning his back on standard chord progressions, trumpeter Miles Davis used modal scales as a starting point for composition and improvisation – breaking new ground with warmth, subtlety and understatement in the thick of hard bop. Davis and his peerless band – bassist Paul Chambers, drummer Jimmy Cobb, pianist Bill Evans, and the titanic sax team of John Coltrane and Cannonball Adderley – soloed in uncluttered settings, typified by "melodic rather than harmonic variation," as Davis put it. Two numbers, "All Blues" and "Freddie Freeloader" (the latter featured Wynton Kelly at the ivories in place of Evans), were in 12-bar form, but Davis' approach allowed his players a cool, new, collected freedom. Evans wrote in his original liner notes, "Miles conceived these settings only hours before the re­cording dates and arrived with sketches which indicated to the group what was to be played. Therefore, you will hear something close to pure spontaneity in these performances." Or as the late critic Robert Palmer wrote, "Kind of Blue is, in a sense, all melody – and atmosphere." The bass line in "So What" is now among the most familiar obbligatos in jazz, and there is no finer evocation of the late-night wonder of jazz than the muted horns in "All Blues."
11
Elvis Presley, ‘The Sun Sessions’
Elvis The Sun Sessions high res cover art

RCA, 1999

Many believe rock & roll was born on July 5th, 1954, at Sun Studio in Memphis. Elvis Presley, guitarist Scotty Moore and bassist Bill Black were horsing around with "That's All Right, Mama," a tune by bluesman Arthur "Big Boy" Crudup, when producer Sam Phillips stopped them and asked, "What are you doing?" "We don't know," they said. Phillips told them to "back up and do it again." The A side of Presley's first single (backed with a version of Bill Monroe's "Blue Moon of Kentucky"), "That's All Right" was issued by Sun on July 19th. It may or may not be the first rock & roll record. But the man who would be King was officially on wax. Bridging black and white, country and blues, his sound was playful and revolutionary, charged by a spontaneity and freedom that changed the world. "It's the blues," critic Greil Marcus wrote in his classic book Mystery Train. "But free of all worry, all sin; a simple joy with no price to pay." Presley released four more singles on Sun – including definitive reinventions of Wynonie Harris' "Good Rockin' Tonight" and Junior Parker's "Mystery Train" – before moving on to immortality when Phillips sold his contract to RCA for $35,000. Incredibly, it took more than 20 years for Presley's Sun output to be properly collected on a 1976 LP – which has since been superseded by this 1999 double-CD chronicle of the King's beginnings at Sun. It collects everything he cut at the studio, including alternate takes and the 1953 acetate he recorded as a gift for his mother as a shy and awkward recent high school graduate.
10
The Beatles, ‘The White Album’
The Beatles "White Album" high res cover art

Capitol, 1968

They wrote the songs while on retreat with the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in India, taking a break from the celebrity whirl. As John Lennon later said, "We sat in the mountains eating lousy vegetarian food and writing all these songs." They came back with more great tunes than they could fit on a single LP, and competed fiercely during the sessions. "I remember having three studios operating at the same time," George Harrison recalled. "Paul was doing some overdubs in one, John was in another, and I was recording some horns or something in a third." The sessions became so tense that Ringo Starr quit the band in frustration for two weeks. Yet the creative tension resulted in one of the most intense and adventurous rock albums ever made. Lennon pursued his hard-edged vision into the cynical wit of "Sexy Sadie" and "Happiness Is a Warm Gun," but also infused "Julia" and "Dear Prudence" with childlike yearning. Paul McCartney's playful pop energy came through on his inversion of Chuck Berry's American values, "Back in the U.S.S.R.," and he showed off his raucous side in "Helter Skelter." Harrison's spiritual yearning led him to "Long, Long, Long" and "While My Guitar Gently Weeps," featuring a guest guitar solo from Eric Clapton. Even Starr contributed his first original, the country-tinged "Don't Pass Me By." "I think it was a very good album," said McCartney. "It stood up, but it wasn't a pleasant one to make."
9
Bob Dylan, ‘Blonde on Blonde’
Bob Dylan "Blonde on Blonde" high res cover art

Columbia, 1966

Released on May 16th, 1966, rock's first studio double LP by a major artist was, as Dylan declared in 1978, "the closest I ever got to the sound I hear in my mind… that thin, that wild-mercury sound." There is no better description of the album's manic brilliance. After several false-start sessions in New York in the fall of 1965 and January 1966 with his killer road band the Hawks – "One of Us Must Know (Sooner or Later)" was the only keeper – Dylan blazed through the rest of Blonde on Blonde's 14 tracks in one four-day run and one three-day run at Columbia's Nashville studios in February and March 1966.

The pace of recording echoed the amphetamine velocity of Dylan's songwriting and touring schedule at the time. But the combined presence of trusted hands like organist Al Kooper and Hawks guitarist Robbie Robertson with expert local sessionmen including drummer Kenneth ­Buttrey and pianist Hargus "Pig" Robbins created an almost contradictory magnificence: a tightly wound tension around Dylan's quicksilver language and incisive singing in barrelhouse surrealism such as "Rainy Day Women #12 & 35" and "Stuck Inside of Mobile With the Memphis Blues Again," the hilarious Chicago-style blues "Leopard-Skin Pill-Box Hat" and the scornful, fragile "Just Like a Woman," still his greatest ballad.

Amid the frenzy, Dylan delivered some of his finest, clearest songs of comfort and desire: the sidelong beauty of the 11-minute "Sad Eyed Lady of the Lowlands," recorded in just one take at four in the morning after an eight-hour session, and "I Want You," the title of which Dylan almost used for the album.
8
The Clash, ‘London Calling’
The Clash London Calling high res cover art

Epic, 1980

Recorded in 1979 in London, which was then wrenched by surging unemployment and drug addiction, and released in America in January 1980, the dawn of an uncertain decade, London Calling is 19 songs of apocalypse, fueled by an unbending faith in rock & roll to beat back the darkness. Produced with no-surrender energy by legendary Seventies studio madman Guy Stevens, the Clash's third album skids from bleak punk ("London Calling") to rampaging ska ("Wrong 'Em Boyo") and disco resignation ("Lost in the Supermarket"). The album was made in dire straits too. The band was heavily in debt and openly at war with its record company. Singer-guitarists Joe Strummer and Mick Jones wrote together in Jones' grandmother's flat. "Joe, once he learned how to type, would bang the lyrics out," Jones said. "Then I'd be able to bang out some music while he was hitting the typewriter." Strummer, Jones, bassist Paul Simonon and drummer Topper Headon spent nearly three months rehearsing and demoing songs in a garage in the Pimlico section of London – "with one light and filthy carpet on the walls for soundproofing," recalled Strummer in 1989. "We felt that we were struggling," he said, "about to slide down a slope or something, grasping with our fingernails." But Stevens was on hand for inspiration. He threw chairs around the room "if he thought a track needed zapping up," according to Strummer. The album ends with "Train in Vain," a rousing song of fidelity (unlisted on the back cover because it was added at the last minute) that became the sound of triumph: the Clash's first Top 30 single in the U.S.
7
The Rolling Stones, ‘Exile on Main Street’
Rolling STones "Exile on Main St." high res cover art

Rolling Stones Records, 1972

A dirty whirl of blues and boogie, the Rolling Stones' 1972 double LP "was the first grunge record," guitarist Keith Richards crowed proudly in a 2002 interview. But inside the deliberately dense squall – Richards' and Mick Taylor's dogfight riffing, the lusty jump of the Bill Wyman-Charlie Watts rhythm engine, Mick Jagger's caged-­animal bark and burned-soul croon – is the Stones' greatest album and Jagger and Richards' definitive songwriting statement of outlaw pride and dedication to grit. In the existential shuffle "Tumbling Dice," the exhausted country beauty "Torn and Frayed" and the whiskey-soaked uplift of "Shine a Light," you literally hear the Stones in exile: working at Richards' villa in the South of France, and on the run from media censure, British drug police (Jagger and Richards already knew the view from behind bars) and the country's onerous tax code. Exile is rife with allusions to their outsider status: The album's cover is a collage of freakish American characters, and on "Sweet Black Angel" they toast imprisoned activist Angela Davis – one set of renegades to another. The music rattles like battle but also swings with clear purpose on songs like "Rocks Off" and "All Down the Line." As Richards explained, "The Stones don't have a home anymore – hence the Exile – but they can still keep it together. Whatever people throw at us, we can still duck, improvise, overcome." Great example: Richards recorded his jubilant romp "Happy" with just producer Jimmy Miller on drums and saxman Bobby Keys – while waiting for the other Stones to turn up for work. Exile on Main Street is the Stones at their fighting best, armed with the blues, playing to win.
6
Marvin Gaye, ‘What’s Going On’
Marvin Gaye "What's Going On" high res cover art

Motown, 1971

"In 1969 or 1970, I began to re-evaluate my whole concept of what I wanted my music to say," Marvin Gaye said. "I was very much affected by letters my brother was sending me from Vietnam, as well as the social situation here at home. I realized that I had to put my own fantasies behind me if I wanted to write songs that would reach the souls of people. I wanted them to take a look at what was happening in the world." The masterpiece that followed Gaye's awakening revolutionized black music. From its rich, string-suffused grooves to its boundless sense of possibility, What's Going On is the Sgt. Pepper of soul.

Gaye was determined to shatter Motown's pop formula and address pressing social issues. Motown founder Berry Gordy was not pleased. He claimed that "What's Going On" was the worst song he had ever heard. As for "Mercy Mercy Me (The Ecology)," Gordy asserted that he didn't even know what the word "ecology" meant. Gaye responded that he would never record for Motown again unless "What's Going On" was released as a single. After initially being rejected by Motown's quality-control committee, it was; when the song became a Top Five hit, the album – and a burst of socially conscious music from Motown – followed soon after. Working amid a haze of marijuana smoke, Gaye made one intuitively brilliant decision after another – from letting the tapes roll as his friends mingled to recording the rehearsal exercises of saxophonist Eli Fontaine. When Fontaine told Gaye that he had just been goofing around, Gaye replied, "Well, you goof exquisitely. Thank you." And that's how the plaintive saxophone line that announces What's Going On came to be.
5
The Beatles, ‘Rubber Soul’
The Beatles "Rubber Soul" high res cover art

Capitol, 1965

In 1965, radios were abuzz with such groundbreaking singles as "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction" and "Like a Rolling Stone." That December, the Beatles met their peers' challenge head-on with Rubber Soul, a stunning collection that preserved the taut pop focus of the band's earlier LPs while introducing newfound sophistication and depth. Producer George Martin described Rubber Soul as "the first album to present a new, growing Beatles to the world," and so it was.

The moptops were evolving in remarkable ways. "Drive My Car" is a comic character study of a sort not previously in the Beatles' repertoire. More profoundly, however, Bob Dylan's influence suffuses the album, accounting for the tart emotional tone of "Norwegian Wood," "I'm Looking Through You," "You Won't See Me" and "If I Needed Someone." (Dylan would return the compliment the following year, when he offered his own version of "Norwegian Wood" – titled "4th Time Around" – on Blonde on Blonde, and reportedly made John Lennon paranoid.) Lennon's "Nowhere Man," which he later acknowledged as a depressed self-portrait, and the beautifully reminiscent "In My Life" both reflect the more serious and personal style of songwriting that Dylan had suddenly made possible.

George Harrison's sitar on "Norwegian Wood" – the first time the instrument was used in a pop song – and Paul McCartney's fuzz bass on "Think for Yourself" document the band's increasing awareness that the studio could be more than a pit stop between tours. Harrison called Rubber Soul "the best one we made," because "we were suddenly hearing sounds that we weren't able to hear before." And as for why the band's hearing had grown so acute, well, that was another aspect of the times. "There was a lot of experimentation on Rubber Soul," said Ringo Starr, "influenced, I think, by the substances."
4
Bob Dylan, ‘Highway 61 Revisited’
Bob Dylan "Highway 61 Revisited" high res cover art

Columbia, 1965

Bruce Springsteen described the beginning of "Like a Rolling Stone," the opening song on Highway 61 Revisited, as the "snare shot that sounded like somebody'd kicked open the door to your mind." Folk singer Phil Ochs was even more rhapsodic about the LP: "It's impossibly good… How can a human mind do this?"

Recorded in a staggering six days, Highway 61 Revisited – named after the road that runs from Bob Dylan's home state of Minnesota down through the Mississippi Delta – is one of those albums that changed everything. In and of itself, "Like a Rolling Stone," rumored to be about Andy Warhol acolyte Edie Sedgwick, forever altered the landscape of popular music – its "vomitiﬁc" flow (Dylan's term), literary ambition and sheer length (6:13) shattered limitations of every kind. "Ballad of a Thin Man" delivered the definitive Sixties comment on the splintering hip-straight fault line: "Something is happening here, but you don't know what it is/Do you, Mister Jones?" If anyone questioned whether or not Dylan had truly  "gone electric," the roaring rock & roll of  "From a Buick 6" and "Tombstone Blues" – powered by guitarist Mike Bloomﬁeld – left no doubt.

The album ends with "Desolation Row," a surrealist night journey that runs 11 minutes. Dylan evokes a Hieronymus Bosch-like season in hell that seems to foretell all the Sixties cataclysms to come. "The Titanic sails at dawn," he sings wearily. "Everybody is shouting, 'Which side are you on?'" That "Desolation Row" is an all-acoustic track – a last-minute decision on Dylan's part – is one final stroke of genius: a spellbinding new vision of folk music to close the album that, for the time being at least, destroyed folk music.
3
The Beatles, ‘Revolver’
The Beatles "Revolver" high res cover art

Capitol, 1966

"I don't see too much difference between Revolver and Rubber Soul," George Harrison once said. "To me, they could be Volume One and Volume Two." Revolver extends the more adventurous aspects of its predecessor – its introspection, its nascent psychedelia, its fascination with studio artistry – into a dramatic statement of generational possibility.

The album, which was released in August 1966, made it thrillingly clear that what we now think of as "the Sixties" was fully – and irreversibly – under way.

The most innovative track on the album is John Lennon's "Tomorrow Never Knows." Attempting to distill an LSD trip into a three-minute song, Lennon borrowed lyrics from Timothy Leary's version of The Tibetan Book of the Dead, and recorded his vocal to sound like "the Dalai Lama singing from the highest mountaintop." Tape loops, a backward guitar part (Paul McCartney's blistering solo on "Taxman," in fact) and a droning tamboura completed the experimental effect, and the song proved hugely influential. For his part, on "Eleanor Rigby" and "For No One," McCartney mastered a strikingly mature form of art song, and Harrison, with "Taxman," "I Want to Tell You" and "Love You To," challenged Lennon-McCartney's songwriting dominance.

Part of the album's revolutionary impulse was visual. Klaus Voormann, one of the Beatles' artist buddies from their days in Hamburg, Germany, designed a striking photo-collage cover for Revolver; it was a crucial step on the road to the even trippier, more colorful imagery of Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band, which would come less than a year later.

Revolver signaled that in popular music, anything – any theme, any musical idea – could now be realized. And, in the case of the Beatles, would be.
2
The Beach Boys, ‘Pet Sounds’
The Beach Boys "Pet Sounds" high res cover art 002

Capitol, 1966

"Who's gonna hear this shit?" Beach Boys singer Mike Love asked the band's resident genius, Brian Wilson, in 1966, as Wilson played him the new songs he was working on. "The ears of a dog?" But Love's contempt proved oddly useful: "Ironically," Wilson observed, "Mike's barb inspired the album's title." Barking dogs – Wilson's dog Banana among them, in fact – are prominent among the found sounds on the album. The Beatles made a point of echoing them on Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band – an acknowledgment that Pet Sounds was the inspiration for the Beatles' masterpiece. That gesture actually completed a circle of influence: Wilson initially conceived of Pet Sounds as an effort to top the Beatles' Rubber Soul.

With its vivid orchestration, lyrical ambition, elegant pacing and thematic coherence, Pet Sounds invented – and in some sense perfected – the idea that an album could be more than the sum of its parts. When Wilson sang, "Wouldn't it be nice if we were older?" on the magnificent opener, he wasn't just imagining a love that could evolve past high school; he was suggesting a new grown-up identity for rock & roll music itself.

Wilson essentially made Pet Sounds without the rest of the band, using them only to flesh out the vocal arrangements. (He even considered putting the album out as a solo project, and the first single, "Caroline, No," was released under his own name.) Its luxurious sound conveys a heartbreaking wistfulness, and the deeply personal songs, which Wilson co-wrote primarily with lyricist Tony Asher, bid farewell to the innocent world of the Beach Boys' fun-in-the-sun hits. Unfortunately, Capitol Records proved no more enamored of Pet Sounds than had Love; the label considered not releasing it at all. Not yet vindicated by history, Wilson withdrew further into his inner world. "At the last meeting I attended concerning Pet Sounds," Wilson wrote about his dealings with the label, "I showed up holding a tape player and eight prerecorded, looped responses, including 'No comment,' 'Can you repeat that?' 'No' and 'Yes.' Refusing to utter a word, I played the various tapes when appropriate."
1
The Beatles, ‘Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band’

Capitol, 1967

Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band is the most important rock & roll album ever made, an unsurpassed adventure in concept, sound, songwriting, cover art and studio technology by the greatest rock & roll group of all time. From the title song’s regal blasts of brass and fuzz guitar to the orchestral seizure and long, dying piano chord at the end of “A Day in the Life,” the 13 tracks on Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band are the pinnacle of the Beatles’ eight years as recording artists. John Lennon, Paul McCartney, George Harrison and Ringo Starr were never more fearless and unified in their pursuit of magic and transcendence.

Issued in Britain on June 1st, 1967, and a day later in America, Sgt. Pepper is also rock’s ultimate declaration of change. For the Beatles, it was a decisive goodbye to matching suits, world tours and assembly-line record-making. “We were fed up with being Beatles,” McCartney said decades later, in Many Years From Now, Barry Miles’ McCartney biography. “We were not boys, we were men… artists rather than performers.

At the same time, Sgt. Pepper formally ushered in an unforgettable season of hope, upheaval and achievement: the late 1960s and, in particular, 1967’s Summer of Love. In its iridescent instrumentation, lyric fantasias and eye-popping packaging, Sgt. Pepper defined the opulent revolutionary optimism of psychedelia and instantly spread the gospel of love, acid, Eastern spirituality and electric guitars around the globe. No other pop record of that era, or since, has had such an immediate, titanic impact. This music documents the world’s biggest rock band at the very height of its influence and ambition.

“It was a peak,” Lennon told Rolling Stone in 1970, describing both the album and his collaborative relationship with McCartney. “Paul and I were definitely working together,” Lennon said, and Sgt. Pepper is rich with proof: McCartney’s burst of hot piano and school-days memoir (“Woke up, fell out of bed…”) in Lennon’s “A Day in the Life,” a reverie on mortality and infinity; Lennon’s impish rejoinder to McCartney’s chorus in “Getting Better” (“It can’t get no worse”).

“Sgt. Pepper was our grandest endeavor,” Starr said, looking back, in the band’s 2000 autobiography, The Beatles Anthology. “The greatest thing about the band was that whoever had the best idea – it didn’t matter who – that was the one we’d use.” It was Neil Aspinall, the Beatles’ longtime assistant, who suggested they reprise the title track, just before the finale of “A Day in the Life,” to complete Sgt. Pepper‘s theatrical conceit: an imaginary concert by a fictional band, played by the Beatles.

The first notes went to tape on December 6th, 1966: two takes of McCartney’s music-hall confection “When I’m Sixty-Four.” (Lennon’s lysergic reflection on his Liverpool childhood, “Strawberry Fields Forever,” was started two weeks earlier but issued in February 1967 as a stand-alone single.) But Sgt. Pepper‘s real birthday is August 29th, 1966, when the Beatles played their last live concert, in San Francisco. Until then, they had made history in the studio between punishing tours. Off the road for good, the Beatles were free to be a band away from the hysteria of Beatlemania.

McCartney went a step further. On a plane to London in November ’66, as he returned from a vacation in Kenya, he came up with the idea of an album by the Beatles in disguise, an alter-ego group that he subsequently dubbed Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band. “We’d pretend to be someone else,” McCartney explained in Anthology. “It liberated you – you could do anything when you got to the mic or on your guitar, because it wasn’t you.”

Only two songs on the final LP, both McCartney’s, had anything to do with the Pepper characters: the title track and Starr’s jaunty vocal showcase, “With a Little Help From My Friends,” introduced as a number by Sgt. Pepper‘s star crooner, Billy Shears. “Every other song could have been on any other album,” Lennon insisted later. Yet it is hard to imagine a more perfect setting for the Victorian jollity of Lennon’s “Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!” (inspired by an 1843 circus poster) or the sumptuous melancholy of McCartney’s “Fixing a Hole,” with its blend of antique shadows (a harpsichord played by the Beatles’ producer, George Martin) and modern sunshine (double-tracked lead guitar executed with ringing precision by Harrison). The Pepper premise was a license to thrill.

It also underscored the real-life cohesion of the music and the group that made it. Of the 700 hours the Beatles spent making Sgt. Pepper from the end of 1966 until April 1967, the group needed only three days’ worth to complete Lennon’s lavish daydream “Lucy in the Sky With Diamonds.” “A Day in the Life,” the most complex song on the album, was done in just five days. (The oceanic piano chord was three pianos hit simultaneously by 10 hands belonging to Lennon, McCartney, Starr, Martin and Beatles roadie Mal Evans.) No other Beatles appear with Harrison on his sitar-perfumed sermon on materialism and fidelity, “Within You Without You,” but the band wisely placed the track at the halfway point of the original vinyl LP, at the beginning of Side Two: a vital meditation break in the middle of the jubilant indulgence.

The Beatles’ exploitation of multitracking transformed the very act of studio recording (the orchestral overdubs on “A Day in the Life” marked the debut of eight-track recording in Britain: two four-track machines used in sync). And Sgt. Pepper‘s visual extravagance officially elevated the album cover to a work of art. Michael Cooper’s photo of the Beat­les in satin marching-band outfits, in front of a cardboard-cutout audience of historical figures, created by artist Peter Blake, is the most enduring image of the psychedelic era. Sgt. Pepper was also the first rock album to incorporate complete lyrics to the songs in its design.

Yet Sgt. Pepper is the Number One album of the RS 500 not just because of its firsts – it is simply the best of everything the Beatles ever did as musicians, pioneers and pop stars, all in one place. A 1967 British print ad for the album declared, “Remember, Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band Is the Beatles.” As McCartney put it, the album was “just us doing a good show.”

The show goes on forever.

Voters: Bill Adler (Biographer, Run-DMC), Lou Adler (Producer), Vince Aletti (Writer), Art Alexakis (Everclear), Pelle Almqvist (The Hives), Billy Altman (Writer), Jeff Ament (Pearl Jam), Roger Ames (Former chairman and CEO, Warner Music Group), Billie Joe Armstrong (Green Day), Nicholaus Arson (The Hives), Dick Asher (Former CEO, Polygram Records), James Austin (Former A&R, Rhino Records), Michael Azerrad (Writer), Irving Azoff (Executive chairman, Live Nation), Martin Bandier (Chairman and CEO, Sony/ATV), Devendra Banhart, Peter Barakan (Radio host), Johnny Barbis (Chairman, Rocket Music), Ken Barnes (Writer), Kevin Barnes (Of Montreal), Frank Barsalona (Former consultant, William Morris Agency), Rostam Batmanglij (Vampire Weekend), David Bauder (Writer), Beck, Jules Belkin (Former president, Belkin Productions),Andy Bell (Erasure), Bill Belmont (Former VP, international operations, Fantasy Records), Bill Bentley (Director, A&R, Vanguard Records), Steve Berkowitz (Senior VP, A&R,  Legacy Recordings), James Bernard (Co-founder, The Source and XXL magazines), Cathy Bernardy Jones (Former editor, Goldmine magazine), Guy Berryman (Coldplay), Jim Bessman (Writer), Les Bider (Former chairman and CEO, Warner/Chappell Music), Scott Billington (VP, A&R, Rounder Records), Mark Binelli (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Rodney Bingenheimer (Radio personality), David Bither (Senior VP, Nonesuch Records), Hal Blaine (Drummer), Jerry Blavat (Radio and TV personality), Mary J. Blige, Nathan Brackett (Deputy managing editor, Rolling Stone), Laurent Brancowitz (Phoenix), Harriett Brand (Former senior VP, Universal Music Group), Jon Bream (Writer), Isaac Brock (Modest Mouse), Harold Bronson (Co-founder, Rhino Records), David Browne (Contributing editor,  Rolling Stone), Duncan Browne (COO, Newbury Comics), Jackson Browne, Jonny Buckland (Coldplay), Bebe Buell, Solomon Burke (1940-2010), Cliff Burnstein (Co-founder, Q Prime), James Burton (Guitarist), Geezer Butler (Black Sabbath), Jerry Butler (R&B singer), Joe Butler (The Lovin’ Spoonful), Tom Calderone (President, VH1), Mike Carabello (Santana), Jon Caramanica (Pop critic, The New York Times), Patrick Carney (The Black Keys), Rosemary Carroll (Entertainment lawyer), Will Champion (Coldplay), Brian Chase (Yeah Yeah Yeahs), Marshall Chess (Producer), Deborah Chessler (Songwriter), Robert Christgau (Writer), Lauren Christy (Producer), Jarvis Cocker (Pulp), Mitchell Cohen (VP, A&R, Verve Records), Chris Connelly (Correspondent, ESPN), Tom Constanten (Pianist-composer), Tré Cool (Green Day), Gerard Cosloy (Co-owner, Matador Records), Tommy Couch (Sr.  President, Malaco Music Group), Wayne Coyne (The Flaming Lips), Bill Crandall (Head of content, Rolling Stone Online), Cameron Crowe (Writer-director), Will Dana (Managing editor, Rolling Stone) Britt Daniel (Spoon), Clive Davis (Chief creative officer,  Sony Music Worldwide), Anthony DeCurtis )Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Ron Delsener  (Chairman, Live Nation – New York), John Densmore (The Doors), Don DeVito (Producer (1939-2011)), Rob Dickins (Founder, Instant Karma Records), Bruce Dickinson (Iron Maiden), Dion DiMucci, Dr. John, Jon Dolan (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Antoine “Fats” Domino, Jancee Dunn (Writer), The Edge (U2), Ben Edmonds (Writer), Gavin Edwards (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Graham Edwards (Songwriter and producer), Jenny Eliscu (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Missy Elliott, Michael Endelman (Former senior editor, Rolling Stone), Thomas Erdelyi (Ramones), Melissa Etheridge, Suzan Evans (Former executive director, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame), Phil Everly (Everly Brothers), Bob Ezrin (Producer), Art Fein (Author, TV talk-show host), Danny Fields (Writer, former Stooges and Ramones manager), Jason Fine (Editor at large, Rolling Stone), Jim Fishel (Producer), Bill Flanagan (Editorial director, VH1), Flea (Red Hot Chili Peppers), Chet Flippo (Editorial director, Country Music Television), Jason Flom (President, Lava Records), Caleb Followill (Kings of Leon), Jared Followill (Kings of Leon), Matthew Followill (Kings of Leon), Nathan Followill (Kings of Leon), Ben Fong-Torres (Writer, broadcaster), Richard Foos Founder, (Shout! Factory), Pete Frame (Rock genealogist), Chris Frantz (Talking Heads), Nicole Frehsée (Former assistant editor, Rolling Stone), David Fricke (Senior writer, Rolling Stone), John Frusciante (Red Hot Chili Peppers), Richie Furay (Buffalo Springfield), Elysa Gardner (Writer), Art Garfunkel, Rob Garza(Thievery Corporation), David Geffen (Co-founder, DreamWorks), Gregg Geller (Producer), Gary Gersh (Founder, Strummer Recordings), Andy Gershon (Executive VP, Epic Records), Billy Gibbons (ZZ Top), Charlie Gillett (Radio broadcaster, BBC (1942- 2010)), Mikal Gilmore (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Daniel Glass (Founder, Glassnote Records), Gerry Goffin (Songwriter, producer), Jeff Gold (Owner, recordmecca.com), Michael Goldberg (Editor in chief, neumu.net), Gary Graff (Writer), Andy Greene (Associate editor,  Rolling Stone Online), Ellie Greenwich (Songwriter (1940-2009)), Peter Guralnick (Writer), Brett Gurewitz (Founder, Epitaph Records), Kirk Hammett (Metallica), Albert Hammond Jr. (The Strokes), Davey Havok (AFI), Jim Henke (VP of exhibitions and curatorial affairs,  Rock and Roll Hall of Fame), Will Hermes (Senior critic, Rolling Stone), Raoul Hernandez (Music editor/senior editor, Austin Chronicle), James Hetfield (Metallica), Brian Hiatt (Senior writer, Rolling Stone), Robert Hilburn (Former pop-music critic, Los Angeles Times), Michael Hill (Writer, TV-music consultant), Chris Hillman (The Byrds), David Hinckley (TV critic, New York Daily News), Christian Hoard (Senior editor, Rolling Stone), Susanna Hoffs (The Bangles), Mark Hoppus (Blink-182), Bruce Hornsby, Robert Hull (Former executive producer, Time-Life Music), James Hunter (Writer), Scott Ian (Anthrax), Don Ienner (Former chairman and CEO, Sony Music0 U.S.), Bruce Iglauer (President, Alligator Records), Jim James (My Morning Jacket), Bob Jamieson (Former chairman, RCA Music Group), Chris Jasper (Artist, president, Gold City Music), Nick Jonas (Jonas Brothers), Jeff Jones (CEO, Apple Corps), Craig Kallman (Chairman and CEO, Atlantic Records), John David Kalodner (Former A&R executive, Geffen Records), Tony Kanal (No Doubt), Peter Katsis (Manager-partner, Prospect Park), Jorma Kaukonen (Jefferson Airplane), Lenny Kaye (Guitarist), Mark Kemp (Writer), Kid Cudi (Rapper), Carole King, Marc Kirkeby (Music archivist, writer), Howie Klein (Former president, 415 and Reprise Records), Ezra Koenig (Vampire Weekend), Greg Kot (Writer), Howard Kramer (Director of curatorial affairs, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame), Bob Krasnow (Producer), Lenny Kravitz, Damian Kulash (OK Go), Miranda Lambert, Andrew Lauder (Music executive), David Leaf (TV writer, producer), Brenda Lee, David Lefkowitz (Composer), Adam Levine (Maroon 5), Arthur Levy (Writer), Joe Levy (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Alan Light (Writer), Lil Wayne, Amy Linden (Writer), Kurt Loder (Writer), Greg Loescher (Former editor and publisher, Goldmine magazine), Roy Lott (Former president, Virgin Records), Leigh Lust (Former VP of A&R, Atlantic Records), Stan Lynch (Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers), Melissa Maerz (Former senior editor, Rolling Stone), Stephen Malkmus, Shirley Manson (Garbage), Ray Manzarek (The Doors), Thomas Mars (Phoenix), Chris Martin (Coldplay), Mac McCaughan (Co-founder, Merge Records), Joe McEwen (VP, A&R, Concord Music Group), Paul McGuinness (Manager, U2), Christine McVie (Fleetwood Mac), Brad Mehldau (Jazz pianist), Colin Meloy (The Decemberists), Peter Mensch (Co-owner, Q Prime), M.I.A., Milo Miles (Critic, NPR commentator), Kirk Miller (Former associate editor, Rolling Stone), David Mills (TV writer, The Wire(1952-2010)), Martin Mills (Founder, Beggars Banquet Records), Willie Mitchell (Musician-producer  (1928-2010)), Moby, Joseph Modeliste (The Meters), Tom Moon (Writer), Tom Morello (The Nightwatchman), Fabrizio Moretti (The Strokes), Bruce Morrow (Radio personality), Steve Morse (Writer), Alan Moulder (Producer-engineer), Jason Mraz, Dave Navarro (Jane’s Addiction), Tom Nawrocki (Former assistant managing editor, Rolling Stone), Ed Needham (Former managing editor, Rolling Stone), Ashley Newton (Executive VP, A&R, RCA Records), Claude Nobs (Founder-director, the Montreaux Jazz Festival), Yoko Ono, Mo Ostin (Chairman emeritus, Warner Brothers Records), Andy Paley (Musician-producer), John Parrish (Musician-producer), George Pelecanos (Writer), Michael Penn, Claudia Perry (Writer), Michelle Phillips (The Mamas and the Papas), Tony Pipitone (President, Warner Special Projects), Steve Pond (Writer), George Porter Jr. (The Meters), Robert Pruter (R&B editor, Goldmine magazine), Parke Puterbaugh (Writer), Questlove (The Roots), Steve Ralbovsky (Senior VP, A&R, RCA Records), Johnny Ramone (Ramones (1948-2004)), Marky Ramone (Ramones), Sylvia Rhone (Former chairman and CEO, Elektra Records), Jonathan Ringen (Assistant managing editor, Rolling Stone), Cory Robbins (President, Robbins Entertainment), Ira Robbins (Editorial director, MJI Programming, Premiere Radio Network), Robbie Robertson (The Band), Chris Robinson (The Black Crowes), Cynthia Robinson (Sly and the Family Stone), Bob Rock (Producer), Jody Rosen (Senior critic, Rolling Stone), Rick Rubin (Producer, co-founder,  Def Jam), Paul Samwell-Smith (Producer; the Yardbirds), Bob Santelli (Executive director, the Grammy Museum), Austin Scaggs (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Timothy B. Schmit (Eagles), Fred Schneider (The B-52’s), Jordan Schur (President, Suretone Records), Andy Schwartz (Writer), Bud Scoppa (Writer), Gene Sculatti (Writer), John Sebastian (The Lovin’ Spoonful), Pete Seeger, Joel Selvin (Music critic, San Francisco Chronicle), Matt Serletic (Producer), Evan Serpick (Former associate editor, Rolling Stone), Paul Shaffer (Musical director, Late Show With David Letterman), Ron Shapiro (Co-founder, Plan A Media), Rob Sheffield (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Mike Shinoda (Linkin Park), Tom Silverman (Founder and CEO, Tommy Boy Records), Barbara Skydel (Senior VP, William  Morris Agency (1940-2010)), Larry Sloven (Co-owner, executive producer, HighTone Records), Joe Smith (Chairman, Unison Productions), Britney Spears, Scott Spencer (Novelist), Scott Spock (Producer), Freddie Stewart (Sly and the Family Stone), Gary Stewart (Singer-songwriter (1945-2003)), Brian Stoltz (Funky Meters, the Neville Brothers, Bob Dylan), Neil Strauss (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Keith Strickland (The B-52’s), Patrick Stump (Fall Out Boy), John Sykes (President, Clear Channel Entertainment Enterprises), Jeff Tamarkin (Writer), Corey Taylor (Slipknot), Al Teller (Former head, CBS, Columbia and RCA Records), Bruce Thomas (Elvis Costello and the Attractions), Touré (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Allen Toussaint (Producer-songwriter), Roy Trakin (Senior editor, Hits magazine), Jeff Tweedy (Wilco), Lars Ulrich (Metallica), Nick Valensi (The Strokes), Hilton Valentine (The Animals), Andrew VanWyngarden (MGMT), Steven Van Zandt, Tom Vickers (A&R consultant), Butch Vig (Garbage, producer), Phil Walden (Former president,  Velocette Records (1940-2006)), Wale (Rapper), Barry Walters (Writer), Bill Ward (Black Sabbath), Gerard Way (My Chemical Romance), Harry Weinger (VP, A&R, Universal Music Enterprises), Eric Weisbard (Writer), Barry Weiss (CEO, Universal Republic, Island Def Jam Records), Hy Weiss (Founder, Old Town Records (1923-2007)), Steve Weitzman (President, SW Productions), Jann S. Wenner (Editor and publisher, Rolling Stone), Pete Wentz (Fall Out Boy), Tina Weymouth (Talking Heads), Joel Whitbur (President, Record Research), David Whitehead (Owner, Maine Road Management), David Wild (Contributing editor, Rolling Stone), Will.i.am, Lucinda Williams, Hal Willner (Music producer), Muff Winwood (Former president, Sony U.K. A&R), Douglas Wolk (Writer), Richard Wright (Pink Floyd (1943-2008)), Robert Wright, Howard Wuelfing (Howlin’ Wuelf Media), Adam Yauch (Beastie Boys)

Contributors: Pat Blashill, Nathan Brackett, David Browne, Anthony DeCurtis, Matt Diehl, Chuck Eddy, Ben Edmonds, Gavin Edwards, Jenny Eliscu, David Fricke, Elysa Gardner, Holly George-Warren, Andy Greene, Will Hermes, Mark Kemp, Greg Kot, Joe Levy, David McGee, Chris Molaphy, Tom Moon, Rob O’Connor, Parke Puterbaugh, Jody Rosen, Austin Scaggs, Karen Schoemer, Bud Scoppa, Rob Sheffield, David Thigpen, Simon Vozick-Levinson, Barry Walters, Jonah Weiner




